On 2 March 1757 Damiens the regicide was condemned ‘to make 
the amende honorable before the main door of the Church of 
Paris’ , where he was to be ‘taken and conveyed in a cart, 
wearing nothing but a shirt, holding a torch of burning wax 
weighing two pounds’ ; then, ‘in the said cart, to the Place 
de Greve, where, on a scaffold that will be erected there, 
the flesh will be torn from his breasts, arms, thighs and 
calves with red-hot pincers, his right hand, holding the 
knife with which he committed the said parricide, burnt with 
sulphur, and, on those places where the flesh will be torn 
away, poured molten lead, boiling oil, burning resin, wax and 
sulphur melted together and then his body drawn and quartered 
by four horses and his limbs and body consumed by fire, 
reduced to ashes and his ashes thrown to the winds’ (Pieces 
originales ••*, 372 - 4). 

‘Finally, he was quartered, ’ recounts the Gazette 
d’ Amsterdam of 1 April 1757. ‘This last operation was very 
long, because the horses used were not accustomed to drawing; 
consequently, instead of four, six were needed; and when that 
did not suffice, they were forced, in order to cut off the 
wretch’ s thighs, to sever the sinews and hack at the joints 

‘It is said that, though he was always a great swearer, no 
blasphemy escaped his lips; but the excessive pain made him 
utter horrible cries, and he often repeated: “My God, have 
pity on me! Jesus, help me!” The spectators were all edified 
by the solicitude of the parish priest of St Paul’ s who 



despite his great age did not spare himself in offering 
consolation to the patient. 

Bouton, an officer of the watch, left us his account: ‘The 
sulphur was lit, but the flame was so poor that only the top 
skin of the hand was burnt, and that only slightly. Then the 
executioner, his sleeves rolled up, took the steel pincers, 
which had been especially made for the occasion, and which 
were about a foot and a half long, and pulled first at the 
calf of the right leg, then at the thigh, and from there at 
the two fleshy parts of the right arm; then at the breasts. 
Though a strong, sturdy fellow, this executioner found it so 
difficult to tear away the pieces of flesh that he set about 
the same spot two or three times, twisting the pincers as he 
did so, and what he took away formed at each part a wound 
about the size of a six-pound crown piece. 

‘After these tearings with the pincers, Damiens, who cried 
out profusely, though without swearing, raised his head and 
looked at himself; the same executioner dipped an iron spoon 
in the pot containing the boiling potion, which he poured 
liberally over each wound. Then the ropes that were to be 
harnessed to the horses were attached with cords to the 
patient’ s body; the horses were then harnessed and placed 
alongside the arms and legs, one at each limb. 

‘Monsieur Le Breton, the clerk of the court, went up to 
the patient several times and asked him if he had anything to 
say. He said he had not; at each torment, he cried out, as 
the damned in hell are supposed to cry out, “Pardon, my God! 
Pardon, Lord. ” Despite all this pain, he raised his head 
from time to time and looked at himself boldly. The cords had 
been tied so tightly by the men who pulled the ends that they 
caused him indescribable pain. Monsieur le Breton went up to 
him again and asked him if he had anything to say; he said 
no. Several confessors went up to him and spoke to him at 
length; he willingly kissed the crucifix that was held out to 
him; he opened his lips and repeated: “Pardon, Lord. 

‘The horses tugged hard, each pulling straight on a limb, 
each horse held by an executioner. After a quarter of an 



hour, the same ceremony was repeated and finally, after 
several attempts, the direction of the horses had to be 
changed, thus: those at the arms were made to pull towards 
the head, those at the thighs towards the arms, which broke 
the arms at the joints. This was repeated several times 
without success. He raised his head and looked at himself. 

Two more horses had to be added to those harnessed to the 
thighs, which made six horses in all. Without success. 

‘Finally, the executioner, Samson, said to Monsieur Le 
Breton that there was no way or hope of succeeding, and told 
him to ask their Lordships if they wished him to have the 
prisoner cut into pieces. Monsieur Le Breton, who had come 
down from the town, ordered that renewed efforts be made, and 
this was done; but the horses gave up and one of those 
harnessed to the thighs fell to the ground. The confessors 
returned and spoke to him again. He said to them (I heard 
him): “Kiss me, gentlemen. ” The parish priest of St Paul’ s 
did not dare to, so Monsieur de Marsilly slipped under the 
rope holding the left arm and kissed him on the forehead. The 
executioners gathered round and Damiens told them not to 
swear, to carry out their task and that he did not think ill 
of them; he begged them to pray to God for him, and asked the 
parish priest of St Paul* s to pray for him at the first 
mass. 

‘After two or three attempts, the executioner Samson and 
he who had used the pincers each drew out a knife from his 
pocket and cut the body at the thighs instead of severing the 
legs at the joints; the four horses gave a tug and carried 
off the two thighs after them, namely, that of the right side 
first, the other following; then the same was done to the 
arms, the shoulders, the arm-pits and the four limbs; the 
flesh had to be cut almost to the bone, the horses pulling 
hard carried off the right arm first and the other 
afterwards. 

‘When the four limbs had been pulled away, the confessors 
came to speak to him; but his executioner told them that he 
was dead, though the truth was that I saw the man move, his 



lower jaw moving from side to side as if he were talking. One 
of the executioners even said shortly afterwards that when 
they had lifted the trunk to throw it on the stake, he was 
still alive. The four limbs were untied from the ropes and 
thrown on the stake set up in the enclosure in line with the 
scaffold, then the trunk and the rest were covered with logs 
and faggots, and fire was put to the straw mixed with this 
wood. 

In accordance with the decree, the whole was reduced 
to ashes. The last piece to be found in the embers was still 
burning at half-past ten in the evening. The pieces of flesh 
and the trunk had taken about four hours to burn. The 
officers of whom I was one, as also was my son, and a 
detachment of archers remained in the square until nearly 
eleven o’ clock. 

‘There were those who made something of the fact that a 
dog had lain the day before on the grass where the fire had 
been, had been chased away several times, and had always 
returned. But it is not difficult to understand that an 
animal found this place warmer than elsewhere’ (quoted in 
Zevaes, 201 - 14). 

Eighty years later, Leon Faucher drew up his rules ‘for 
the House of young prisoners in Paris’ : 

‘Art. 17. The prisoners’ day will begin at six in the 
morning in winter and at five in summer. They will work for 
nine hours a day throughout the year. Two hours a day will be 
devoted to instruction. Work and the day will end at nine 
o’ clock in winter and at eight in summer. 

Art. 18. Rising. At the first drum-roll, the prisoners must 
rise and dress in silence, as the supervisor opens the cell 
doors. At the second drum-roll, they must be dressed and make 
their beds. At the third, they must line up and proceed to 
the chapel for morning prayer. There is a five-minute 
interval between each drum-roll. 

Art. 19. The prayers are conducted by the chaplain and 
followed by a moral or religious reading. This exercise must 



not last more than half an hour. 

Art. 20. Work. At a quarter to six in the summer, a quarter 
to seven in winter, the prisoners go down into the courtyard 
where they must wash their hands and faces, and receive their 
first ration of bread. Immediately afterwards, they form into 
work-teams and go off to work, which must begin at six in 
summer and seven in winter. 

Art. 21. Meal. At ten o’ clock the prisoners leave their 
work and go to the refectory; they wash their hands in their 
courtyards and assemble in divisions. After the dinner, there 
is recreation until twenty minutes to eleven. 

Art. 22. School. At twenty minutes to eleven, at the drum- 
roll, the prisoners form into ranks, and proceed in divisions 
to the school. The class lasts two hours and consists 
alternately of reading, writing, drawing and arithmetic. 

Art. 23. At twenty minutes to one, the prisoners leave the 
school, in divisions, and return to their courtyards for 
recreation. At five minutes to one, at the drum-roll, they 
form into work-teams. 

Art. 24. At one o’ clock they must be back in the 
workshops: they work until four o’ clock. 

Art. 25. At four o’ clock the prisoners leave their 
workshops and go into the courtyards where they wash their 
hands and form into divisions for the refectory. 

Art. 26. Supper and the recreation that follows it last 
until five o’ clock: the prisoners then return to the 
workshops. 

Art. 27. At seven o’ clock in the summer, at eight in 
winter, work stops; bread is distributed for the last time in 
the workshops. For a quarter of an hour one of the prisoners 
or supervisors reads a passage from some instructive or 
uplifting work. This is followed by evening prayer. 

Art. 28. At half-past seven in summer, half-past eight in 
winter, the prisoners must be back in their cells after the 
washing of hands and the inspection of clothes in the 
courtyard; at the first drum-roll, they must undress, and at 
the second get into bed. The cell doors are closed and the 



supervisors go the rounds in the corridors, to ensure order 
and silence’ (Faucher, 274 - 82). 

We have, then, a public execution and a time-table. They do 
not punish the same crimes or the same type of delinquent. 

But they each define a certain penal style. Less than a 
century separates them. It was a time when, in Europe and in 
the United States, the entire economy of punishment was 
redistributed. It was a time of great ‘scandals’ for 
traditional justice, a time of innumerable projects for 
reform. It saw a new theory of law and crime, a new moral or 
political justification of the right to punish; old laws were 
abolished, old customs died out. ‘Modern’ codes were 
planned or drawn up: Russia, 1769; Prussia, 1780; 

Pennsylvania and Tuscany, 1786; Austria, 1788; France, 1791, 
Year IV, 1808 and 1810. It was a new age for penal justice. 

Among so many changes, I shall consider one: the 
disappearance of torture as a public spectacle. Today we are 
rather inclined to ignore it; perhaps, in its time, it gave 
rise to too much inflated rhetoric; perhaps it has been 
attributed too readily and too emphatically to a process of 
‘humanization’ , thus dispensing with the need for further 
analysis. And, in any case, how important is such a change, 
when compared with the great institutional transformations, 
the formulation of explicit, general codes and unified rules 
of procedure; with the almost universal adoption of the jury 
system, the definition of the essentially corrective 
character of the penalty and the tendency, which has become 
increasingly marked since the nineteenth century, to adapt 
punishment to the individual offender? Punishment of a less 
immediately physical kind, a certain discretion in the art of 
inflicting pain, a combination of more subtle, more subdued 
sufferings, deprived of their visible display, should not all 
this be treated as a special case, an incidental effect of 
deeper changes? And yet the fact remains that a few decades 
saw the disappearance of the tortured, dismembered, amputated 
body, symbolically branded on face or shoulder, exposed alive 



or dead to public view. The body as the major target of penal 
repression disappeared. 

By the end of the eighteenth and the beginning of the 
nineteenth century, the gloomy festival of punishment was 
dying out, though here and there it flickered momentarily 
into life. In this transformation, two processes were at 
work. They did not have quite the same chronology or the same 
raison d’ etre. The first was the disappearance of punishment 
as a spectacle. The ceremonial of punishment tended to 
decline; it survived only as a new legal or administrative 
practice. The amende honorable was first abolished in France 
in 1791, then again in 1830 after a brief revival; the 
pillory was abolished in France in 1789 and in England in 
1837. The use of prisoners in public works, cleaning city 
streets or repairing the highways, was practised in Austria, 
Switzerland and certain of the United States, such as 
Pennsylvania. These convicts, distinguished by their 
‘infamous dress’ and shaven heads, ‘were brought before 
the public. The sport of the idle and the vicious, they often 
become incensed, and naturally took violent revenge upon the 
aggressors. To prevent them from returning injuries which 
might be inflicted on them, they were encumbered with iron 
collars and chains to which bombshells were attached, to be 
dragged along while they performed their degrading service, 
under the eyes of keepers armed with swords, blunderbusses 
and other weapons of destruction’ (Roberts Vaux, Notices, 

21, quoted in Teeters, 1937, 24). This practice was abolished 
practically everywhere at the end of the eighteenth or the 
beginning of the nineteenth century. The public exhibition of 
prisoners was maintained in France in 1831, despite violent 
criticism - ‘a disgusting scene’ , said Real (cf. 
Bibliography); it was finally abolished in April 1848. While 
the chain-gang, which had dragged convicts across the whole 
of France, as far as Brest and Toulon, was replaced in 1837 
by inconspicuous black-painted cell-carts. Punishment had 
gradually ceased to be a spectacle. And whatever theatrical 
elements it still retained were now downgraded, as if the 



functions of the penal ceremony were gradually ceasing to be 
understood, as if this rite that ‘concluded the crime’ was 
suspected of being in some undesirable way linked with it. It 
was as if the punishment was thought to equal, if not to 
exceed, in savagery the crime itself, to accustom the 
spectators to a ferocity from which one wished to divert 
them, to show them the frequency of crime, to make the 
executioner resemble a criminal, judges murderers, to reverse 
roles at the last moment, to make the tortured criminal an 
object of pity or admiration. As early as 1764, Beccaria 
remarked: ‘The murder that is depicted as a horrible crime 

is repeated in cold blood, remorselessly’ (Beccaria, 101). 
The public execution is now seen as a hearth in which 
violence bursts again into flame. 

Punishment, then, will tend to become the most hidden part 
of the penal process. This has several consequences: it 
leaves the domain of more or less everyday perception and 
enters that of abstract consciousness; its effectiveness is 
seen as resulting from its inevitability, not from its 
visible intensity; it is the certainty of being punished and 
not the horrifying spectacle of public punishment that must 
discourage crime; the exemplary mechanics of punishment 
changes its mechanisms. As a result, justice no longer takes 
public responsibility for the violence that is bound up with 
its practice. If it too strikes, if it too kills, it is not 
as a glorification of its strength, but as an element of 
itself that it is obliged to tolerate, that it finds 
difficult to account for. The apportioning of blame is 
redistributed: in punishment-as-spectacle a confused horror 
spread from the scaffold; it enveloped both executioner and 
condemned; and, although it was always ready to invert the 
shame inflicted on the victim into pity or glory, it often 
turned the legal violence of the executioner into shame. Now 
the scandal and the light are to be distributed differently; 
it is the conviction itself that marks the offender with the 
unequivocally negative sign: the publicity has shifted to the 
trial, and to the sentence; the execution itself is like an 



additional shame that justice is ashamed to impose on the 
condemned man; so it keeps its distance from the act, tending 
always to entrust it to others, under the seal of secrecy. It 
is ugly to be punishable, but there is no glory in punishing. 
Hence that double system of protection that justice has set 
up between itself and the punishment it imposes. Those who 
carry out the penalty tend to become an autonomous sector; 
justice is relieved of responsibility for it by a 
bureaucratic concealment of the penalty itself. It is typical 
that in France the administration of the prisons should for 
so long have been the responsibility of the Ministry of the 
Interior, while responsibility for the bagnes, for penal 
servitude in the convict ships and penal settlements, lay 
with the Ministry of the Navy or the Ministry of the 
Colonies. And beyond this distribution of roles operates a 
theoretical disavowal: do not imagine that the sentences that 
we judges pass are activated by a desire to punish; they are 
intended to correct, reclaim, ‘cure’ ; a technique of 
improvement represses, in the penalty, the strict expiation 
of evil-doing, and relieves the magistrates of the demeaning 
task of punishing. In modern justice and on the part of those 
who dispense it there is a shame in punishing, which does not 
always preclude zeal. This sense of shame is constantly 
growing: the psychologists and the minor civil servants of 
moral orthopaedics proliferate on the wound it leaves. 

The disappearance of public executions marks therefore the 
decline of the spectacle; but it also marks a slackening of 
the hold on the body. In 1787, in an address to the Society 
for Promoting Political Enquiries, Benjamin Rush remarked: 

‘I can only hope that the time is not far away when gallows, 
pillory, scaffold, flogging and wheel will, in the history of 
punishment, be regarded as the marks of the barbarity of 
centuries and of countries and as proofs of the feeble 
influence of reason and religion over the human mind’ 

(Teeters, 1935, 30). Indeed, sixty years later, Van Meenen, 
opening the second penitentiary congress, in Brussels, 
recalled the time of his childhood as of a past age: ‘I have 



seen the ground strewn with wheels, gibbets, gallows, 
pillories; I have seen hideously stretched skeletons on 
wheels’ (Annales de la Charite, 529 - 30). Branding had been 
abolished in England (1834) and in France (1832); in 1820, 
England no longer dared to apply the full punishment reserved 
for traitors (Thistlewood was not quartered). Only flogging 
still remained in a number of penal systems (Russia, England, 
Prussia). But, generally speaking, punitive practices had 
become more reticent. One no longer touched the body, or at 
least as little as possible, and then only to reach something 
other than the body itself: It might be objected that 
imprisonment, confinement, forced labour, penal servitude, 
prohibition from entering certain areas, deportation - which 
have occupied so important a place in modern penal systems - 
are ‘physical’ penalties: unlike fines, for example, they 
directly affect the body. But the punishment - body relation 
is not the same as it was in the torture during public 
executions. The body now serves as an instrument or 
intermediary: if one intervenes upon it to imprison it, or to 
make it work, it is in order to deprive the individual of a 
liberty that is regarded both as a right and as property. The 
body, according to this penality, is caught up in a system of 
constraints and privations, obligations and prohibitions. 
Physical pain, the pain of the body itself, is no longer the 
constituent element of the penalty. From being an art of 
unbearable sensations punishment has become an economy of 
suspended rights. If it is still necessary for the law to 
reach and manipulate the body of the convict, it will be at a 
distance, in the proper way, according to strict rules, and 
with a much ‘higher’ aim. As a result of this new 
restraint, a whole army of technicians took over from the 
executioner, the immediate anatomist of pain: warders, 
doctors, chaplains, psychiatrists, psychologists, 
educationalists; by their very presence near the prisoner, 
they sing the praises that the law needs: they reassure it 
that the body and pain are not the ultimate objects of its 
punitive action. Today a doctor must watch over those 



condemned to death, right up to the last moment - thus 
juxtaposing himself as the agent of welfare, as the 
alleviator of pain, with the official whose task it is to end 
life. This is worth thinking about. When the moment of 
execution approaches, the patients are injected with 
tranquillizers. A utopia of judicial reticence: take away 
life, but prevent the patient from feeling it; deprive the 
prisoner of all rights, but do not inflict pain; impose 
penalties free of all pain. Recourse to psycho-pharmacology 
and to various physiological ‘disconnectors’ , even if it is 
temporary, is a logical consequence of this ‘non-corporal’ 
penality. 

The modern rituals of execution attest to this double 
process: the disappearance of the spectacle and the 
elimination of pain. The same movement has affected the 
various European legal systems, each at its own rate: the 
same death for all - the execution no longer bears the 
specific mark of the crime or the social status of the 
criminal; a death that lasts only a moment - no torture must 
be added to it in advance, no further actions performed upon 
the corpse; an execution that affects life rather than the 
body. There are no longer any of those long processes in 
which death was both retarded by calculated interruptions and 
multiplied by a series of successive attacks. There are no 
longer any of those combinations of tortures that were 
organized for the killing of regicides, or of the kind 
advocated, at the beginning of the eighteenth century, by the 
anonymous author of Hanging not Punishment Enough (1701), by 
which the condemned man would be broken on the wheel, then 
flogged until he fainted, then hung up with chains, then 
finally left to die slowly of hunger. There are no longer any 
of those executions in which the condemned man was dragged 
along on a hurdle (to prevent his head smashing against the 
cobble-stones), in which his belly was opened up, his 
entrails quickly ripped out, so that he had time to see them, 
with his own eyes, being thrown on the fire; in which he was 
finally decapitated and his body quartered.- The reduction 


of these ‘thousand deaths’ to strict capital punishment 
defines a whole new morality concerning the act of punishing. 

As early as 1760, a hanging machine had been tried out in 
England (for the execution of Lord Ferrer). It made use of a 
support, which opened under the feet of the condemned man, 
thus avoiding slow deaths and the altercations that occurred 
between victim and executioner. It was improved and finally 
adopted in 1783, the same year in which the traditional 
procession from Newgate to Tyburn was abolished, and in which 
the opportunity offered by the rebuilding of the prison, 
after the Gordon Riots, was used to set up the scaffolds in 
Newgate itself (see Hibbert, 85-6). The celebrated article 3 
of the French Code of 1791 - ‘Every man condemned to death 
will have his head cut off’ - bears this triple 
signification: an equal death for all ( ‘Crimes of the same 
kind will be punished by the same kind of punishment, 
whatever the rank and state of the guilty man may be, ’ in 
the words of the motion proposed by Guillotin and passed on 1 
December 1789); one death per condemned man, obtained by a 
single blow, without recourse to those ‘long and 
consequently cruel’ methods of execution, such as the 
gallows, denounced by Le Peletier; lastly, punishment for the 
condemned man alone, since decapitation, the capital 
punishment of the nobility, was the least shaming for the 
criminal’ s family (Le Peletier, 720). The guillotine, first 
used in March 1792, was the perfect vehicle for these 
principles. Death was reduced to a visible, but instantaneous 
event. Contact between the law, or those who carry it out, 
and the body of the criminal, is reduced to a split second. 
There is no physical confrontation; the executioner need be 
no more than a meticulous watchmaker. ‘Experience and reason 
demonstrate that the method used in the past to cut off the 
head of a criminal exposed him to a torture more frightful 
than the loss of life alone, which is the express intention 
of the law; the execution should therefore be carried out in 
a single moment and with a single blow; examples show how 
difficult it is to achieve this. For the method to work 



perfectly, it must necessarily depend on invariable 
mechanical means whose force and effect may also be 
determined ••• It is an easy enough matter to have such an 
unfailing machine built; decapitation will be performed in a 
moment according to the intention of the new law. If this 
apparatus seems necessary, it will cause no sensation and 
will be scarcely noticed’ (Saint-Edme, 161). The guillotine 
takes life almost without touching the body, just as prison 
deprives of liberty or a fine reduces wealth. It is intended 
to apply the law not so much to a real body capable of 
feeling pain as to a juridical subject, the possessor, among 
other rights, of the right to exist. It had to have the 
abstraction of the law itself. 

No doubt something of the old public execution was, for a 
time, superimposed in France on the sobriety of the new 
method. Parricides - and the regicides who were regarded as 
such - were led to the scaffold wearing a black veil; there, 
until 1832, one of their hands was cut off. Thereafter, 
nothing remained but the ornamental crepe. Thus it was in the 
case of Fieschi, the would-be assassin of Louis-Philippe, in 
November 1836: ‘He will be taken to the place of execution 
wearing a shirt, barefoot, his head covered with a black 
veil; he will be exhibited upon a scaffold while an usher 
reads the sentence to the people, and he will be immediately 
executed. ’ We should remember Damiens - and note that the 
last addition to penal death was a mourning veil. The 
condemned man was no longer to be seen. Only the reading of 
the sentence on the scaffold announced the crime - and that 
crime must be faceless. (The more monstrous a criminal was, 
the more he must be deprived of light: he must not see, or be 
seen. This was a common enough notion at the time. For the 
parricide one should ‘construct an iron cage or dig an 
impenetrable dungeon that would serve him as an eternal 
retreat’ - De Molene, 275 - 7.) The last vestige of the 
great public execution was its annulment: a drapery to hide a 
body. Benoit, triply infamous (his mother’ s murderer, a 
homosexual, an assassin), was the first of the parricides not 



to have a hand cut off: ‘As the sentence was being read, he 
stood on the scaffold supported by the executioners. It was a 
horrible sight; wrapped in a large white shroud, his face 
covered with black crepe, the parricide escaped the gaze of 
the silent crowd, and beneath these mysterious and gloomy 
clothes, life was manifested only by frightful cries, which 
soon expired under the knife’ (Gazette des tribunaux, 30 
August 1832). 

At the beginning of the nineteenth century, then, the great 
spectacle of physical punishment disappeared; the tortured 
body was avoided; the theatrical representation of pain was 
excluded from punishment. The age of sobriety in punishment 
had begun. By 1830 - 48, public executions, preceded by 
torture, had almost entirely disappeared. Of course, this 
generalization requires some qualification. To begin with, 
the changes did not come about at once or as part of a single 
process. There were delays. Paradoxically, England was one of 
the countries most loath to see the disappearance of the 
public execution: perhaps because of the role of model that 
the institution of the jury, public hearings and respect of 
habeas corpus had given to her criminal law; above all, no 
doubt, because she did not wish to diminish the rigour of her 
penal laws during the great social disturbances of the years 
1780 - 1820. For a long time Romilly, Mackintosh and Fowell 
Buxton failed in their attempts to attenuate the multiplicity 
and severity of the penalties laid down by English law - 
that ‘horrible butchery’ , as Rossi described it. Its 
severity (in fact, the juries regarded the penalties laid 
down as excessive and were consequently more lenient in their 
application) had even increased: in 1760, Blackstone had 
listed 160 capital crimes in English legislation, while by 
1819 there were 223. One should also take into account the 
advances and retreats that the process as a whole underwent 
between 1760 and 1840; the rapidity of reform in certain 
countries such as Austria, Russia, the United States, France 
under the Constituent Assembly, then the retreat at the time 
of the counter-revolutions in Europe and the great social 



fear of the years 1820 - 48; more or less temporary changes 
introduced by emergency courts or laws; the gap between the 
laws and the real practice of the courts (which was by no 
means a faithful reflection of the state of legislation). All 
these factors account for the irregularity of the 
transformation that occurred at the turn of the century. 

It should be added that, although most of the changes had 
been achieved by 1840, although the mechanisms of punishment 
had by then assumed their new way of functioning, the process 
was far from complete. The reduction in the use of torture 
was a tendency that was rooted in the great transformation of 
the years 1760 - 1840, but it did not end there; it can be 
said that the practice of the public execution haunted our 
penal system for a long time and still haunts it today. In 
France, the guillotine, that machine for the production of 
rapid and discreet deaths, represented a new ethic of legal 
death. But the Revolution had immediately endowed it with a 
great theatrical ritual. For years it provided a spectacle. 

It had to be removed to the Barriere Saint-Jacques; the open 
cart was replaced by a closed carriage; the condemned man was 
hustled from the vehicle straight to the scaffold; hasty 
executions were organized at unexpected times. In the end, 
the guillotine had to be placed inside prison walls and made 
inaccessible to the public (after the execution of Weidmann 
in 1939), by blocking the streets leading to the prison in 
which the scaffold was hidden, and in which the execution 
would take place in secret (the execution of Buffet and 
Bontemps at the Sante in 1972). Witnesses who described the 
scene could even be prosecuted, thereby ensuring that the 
execution should cease to be a spectacle and remain a strange 
secret between the law and those it condemns. One has only to 
point out so many precautions to realize that capital 
punishment remains fundamentally, even today, a spectacle 
that must actually be forbidden. 

Similarly, the hold on the body did not entirely disappear 
in the mid-nineteenth century. Punishment had no doubt ceased 
to be centred on torture as a technique of pain; it assumed 



as its principal object loss of wealth or rights. But a 
punishment like forced labour or even imprisonment - mere 
loss of liberty - has never functioned without a certain 
additional element of punishment that certainly concerns the 
body itself: rationing of food, sexual deprivation, corporal 
punishment, solitary confinement. Are these the 
unintentional, but inevitable, consequence of imprisonment? 

In fact, in its most explicit practices, imprisonment has 
always involved a certain degree of physical pain. The 
criticism that was often levelled at the penitentiary system 
in the early nineteenth century (imprisonment is not a 
sufficient punishment: prisoners are less hungry, less cold, 
less deprived in general than many poor people or even 
workers) suggests a postulate that was never explicitly 
denied: it is just that a condemned man should suffer 
physically more than other men. It is difficult to dissociate 
punishment from additional physical pain. What would a non¬ 
corporal punishment be? 

There remains, therefore, a trace of ‘torture’ in the 
modern mechanisms of criminal justice - a trace that has not 
been entirely overcome, but which is enveloped, increasingly, 
by the non-corporal nature of the penal system. 

The reduction in penal severity in the last 200 years is a 
phenomenon with which legal historians are well acquainted. 
But, for a long time, it has been regarded in an overall way 
as a quantitative phenomenon: less cruelty, less pain, more 
kindness, more respect, more ‘humanity’ . In fact, these 
changes are accompanied by a displacement in the very object 
of the punitive operation. Is there a diminution of 
intensity? Perhaps. There is certainly a change of objective. 

If the penality in its most severe forms no longer 
addresses itself to the body, on what does it lay hold? The 
answer of the theoreticians - those who, about 1760, opened 
up a new period that is not yet at an end - is simple, 
almost obvious. It seems to be contained in the question 
itself: since it is no longer the body, it must be the soul. 



The expiation that once rained down upon the body must be 
replaced by a punishment that acts in depth on the heart, the 
thoughts, the will, the inclinations. Mably formulated the 
principle once and for all: ‘Punishment, if I may so put it, 
should strike the soul rather than the body’ (Mably, 326). 

It was an important moment. The old partners of the 
spectacle of punishment, the body and the blood, gave way. A 
new character came on the scene, masked. It was the end of a 
certain kind of tragedy; comedy began, with shadow play, 
faceless voices, impalpable entities. The apparatus of 
punitive justice must now bite into this bodiless reality. 

Is this any more than a mere theoretical assertion, 
contradicted by penal practice? Such a conclusion would be 
over-hasty. It is true that, today, to punish is not simply a 
matter of converting a soul; but Mably’ s principle has not 
remained a pious wish. Its effects can be felt throughout 
modern penality. 

To begin with, there is a substitution of objects. By this 
I do not mean that one has suddenly set about punishing other 
crimes. No doubt the definition of offences, the hierarchy of 
their seriousness, the margins of indulgence, what was 
tolerated in fact and what was legally permitted - all this 
has considerably changed over the last 200 years; many crimes 
have ceased to be so because they were bound up with a 
certain exercise of religious authority or a particular type 
of economic activity; blasphemy has lost its status as a 
crime; smuggling and domestic larceny some of their 
seriousness. But these displacements are perhaps not the most 
important fact: the division between the permitted and the 
forbidden has preserved a certain constancy from one century 
to another. On the other hand, ‘crime’ , the object with 
which penal practice is concerned, has profoundly altered: 
the quality, the nature, in a sense the substance of which 
the punishable element is made, rather than its formal 
definition. Undercover of the relative stability of the law, 
a mass of subtle and rapid changes has occurred. Certainly 
the ‘crimes’ and ‘offences’ on which judgement is passed 



are juridical objects defined by the code, but judgement is 
also passed on the passions, instincts, anomalies, 
infirmities, maladjustments, effects of environment or 
heredity; acts of aggression are punished, so also, through 
them, is aggressivity; rape, but at the same time 
perversions; murders, but also drives and desires. But, it 
will be objected, judgement is not actually being passed on 
them; if they are referred to at all it is to explain the 
actions in question, and to determine to what extent the the 
subject’ s will was involved in the crime. This is no answer. 
For it is these shadows lurking behind the case itself that 
are judged and punished. They are judged indirectly as 
‘attenuating circumstances’ that introduce into the verdict 
not only ‘circumstantial’ evidence, but something quite 
different, which is not juridically codifiable: the knowledge 
of the criminal, one’ s estimation of him, what is known 
about the relations between him, his past and his crime, and 
what might be expected of him in the future. They are also 
judged by the interplay of all those notions that have 
circulated between medicine and jurisprudence since the 
nineteenth century (the ‘monsters’ of Georget’ s times, 
Chaumie’ s ‘psychical anomalies’ , the ‘perverts’ and 
‘maladjusted’ of our own experts) and which, behind the 
pretext of explaining an action, are ways of defining an 
individual. They are punished by means of a punishment that 
has the function of making the offender ‘not only desirous, 
but also capable, of living within the law and of providing 
for his own needs’ ; they are punished by the internal 
economy of a penalty which, while intended to punish the 
crime, may be altered (shortened or, in certain cases, 
extended) according to changes in the prisoner’ s behaviour; 
and they are punished by the ‘security measures’ that 
accompany the penalty (prohibition of entering certain areas, 
probation, obligatory medical treatment), and which are 
intended not to punish the offence, but to supervise the 
individual, to neutralize his dangerous state of mind, to 
alter his criminal tendencies, and to continue even when this 



change has been achieved. The criminal’ s soul is not 
referred to in the trial merely to explain his crime and as a 
factor in the juridical apportioning of responsibility; if it 
is brought before the court, with such pomp and circumstance, 
such concern to understand and such ‘scientific’ 
application, it is because it too, as well as the crime 
itself, is to be judged and to share in the punishment. 
Throughout the penal ritual, from the preliminary 
investigation to the sentence and the final effects of the 
penalty, a domain has been penetrated by objects that not 
only duplicate, but also dissociate the juridically defined 
and coded objects. Psychiatric expertise, but also in a more 
general way criminal anthropology and the repetitive 
discourse of criminology, find one of their precise functions 
here: by solemnly inscribing offences in the field of objects 
susceptible of scientific knowledge, they provide the 
mechanisms of legal punishment with a justifiable hold not 
only on offences, but on individuals; not only on what they 
do, but also on what they are, will be, may be. The 
additional factor of the offender’ s soul, which the legal 
system has laid hold of, is only apparently explanatory and 
limitative, and is in fact expansionist. During the 150 or 
200 years that Europe has been setting up its new penal 
systems, the judges have gradually, by means of a process 
that goes back very far indeed, taken to judging something 
other than crimes, namely, the ‘soul’ of the criminal. 

And, by that very fact, they have begun to do something 
other than pass judgement. Or, to be more precise, within the 
very judicial modality of judgement, other types of 
assessment have slipped in, profoundly altering its rules of 
elaboration. Ever since the Middle Ages slowly and painfully 
built up the great procedure of investigation, to judge was 
to establish the truth of a crime, it was to determine its 
author and to apply a legal punishment. Knowledge of the 
offence, knowledge of the offender, knowledge of the law: 
these three conditions made it possible to ground a judgement 
in truth. But now a quite different question of truth is 



inscribed in the course of the penal judgement. The question 
is no longer simply: ‘Has the act been established and is it 
punishable?’ But also: ‘What is this act, what is this act 
of violence or this murder? To what level or to what field of 
reality does it belong? Is it a phantasy, a psychotic 
reaction, a delusional episode, a perverse action?’ It is no 
longer simply: ‘Who committed it?’ But: ‘How can we assign 
the causal process that produced it? Where did it originate 
in the author himself? Instinct, unconscious, environment, 
heredity?’ It is no longer simply: ‘What law punishes this 
offence?’ But: ‘What would be the most appropriate measures 
to take? How do we see the future development of the 
offender? What would be the best way of rehabilitating him?’ 

A whole set of assessing, diagnostic, prognostic, normative 
judgements concerning the criminal have become lodged in the 
framework of penal judgement. Another truth has penetrated 
the truth that was required by the legal machinery; a truth 
which, entangled with the first, has turned the assertion of 
guilt into a strange scientifico-juridical complex. A 
significant fact is the way in which the question of madness 
has evolved in penal practice. According to the 1810 code, 
madness was dealt with only in terms of article 64. Now this 
article states that there is neither crime nor offence if the 
offender was of unsound mind at the time of the act. The 
possibility of ascertaining madness was, therefore, a quite 
separate matter from the definition of an act as a crime; the 
gravity of the act was not altered by the fact that its 
author was insane, nor the punishment reduced as a 
consequence; the crime itself disappeared. It was impossible, 
therefore, to declare that someone was both guilty and mad; 
once the diagnosis of madness had been accepted, it could not 
be included in the judgement; it interrupted the procedure 
and loosened the hold of the law on the author of the act. 

Not only the examination of the criminal suspected of 
insanity, but the very effects of this examination had to be 
external and anterior to the sentence. But, very soon, the 
courts of the nineteenth century began to misunderstand the 



meaning of article 64. Despite several decisions of the 
supreme court of appeal confirming that insanity could not 
result either in a light penalty, or even in an acquittal, 
but required that the case be dismissed, the ordinary courts 
continued to bring the question of insanity to bear on their 
verdicts. They accepted that one could be both guilty and 
mad; less guilty the madder one was; guilty certainly, but 
someone to be put away and treated rather than punished; not 
only a guilty man, but also dangerous, since quite obviously 
sick, etc. From the point of view of the penal code, the 
result was a mass of juridical absurdities. But this was the 
starting point of an evolution that jurisprudence and 
legislation itself was to precipitate in the course of the 
next 150 years: already the reform of 1832, introducing 
attenuating circumstances, made it possible to modify the 
sentence according to the supposed degrees of an illness or 
the forms of a semi-insanity. And the practice of calling on 
psychiatric expertise, which is widespread in the assize 
courts and sometimes extended to courts of summary 
jurisdiction, means that the sentence, even if it is always 
formulated in terms of legal punishment, implies, more or 
less obscurely, judgements of normality, attributions of 
causality, assessments of possible changes, anticipations as 
to the offender’ s future. It would be wrong to say that all 
these operations give substance to a judgement from the 
outside; they are directly integrated in the process of 
forming the sentence. Instead of insanity eliminating the 
crime according to the original meaning of article 64, every 
crime and even every offence now carries within it, as a 
legitimate suspicion, but also as a right that may be 
claimed, the hypothesis of insanity, in any case of anomaly. 
And the sentence that condemns or acquits is not simply a 
judgement of guilt, a legal decision that lays down 
punishment; it bears within it an assessment of normality and 
a technical prescription for a possible normalization. Today 
the judge - magistrate or juror - certainly does more than 
‘judge’ . 



And he is not alone in judging. Throughout the penal 
procedure and the implementation of the sentence there swarms 
a whole series of subsidiary authorities. Small-scale legal 
systems and parallel judges have multiplied around the 
principal judgement: psychiatric or psychological experts, 
magistrates concerned with the implementation of sentences, 
educationalists, members of the prison service, all fragment 
the legal power to punish; it might be objected that none of 
them really shares the right to judge; that some, after 
sentence is passed, have no other right than to implement the 
punishment laid down by the court and, above all, that others 
- the experts - intervene before the sentence not to pass 
judgement, but to assist the judges in their decision. But as 
soon as the penalties and the security measures defined by 
the court are not absolutely determined, from the moment they 
may be modified along the way, from the moment one leaves to 
others than the judges of the offence the task of deciding 
whether the condemned man ‘deserves’ to be placed in semi¬ 
liberty or conditional liberty, whether they may bring his 
penal tutelage to an end, one is handing over to them 
mechanisms of legal punishment to be used at their 
discretion: subsidiary judges they may be, but they are 
judges all the same. The whole machinery that has been 
developing for years around the implementation of sentences, 
and their adjustment to individuals, creates a proliferation 
of the authorities of judicial decision-making and extends 
its powers of decision well beyond the sentence. The 
psychiatric experts, for their part, may well refrain from 
judging. Let us examine the three questions to which, since 
the 1958 ruling, they have to address themselves: Does the 
convicted person represent a danger to society? Is he 
susceptible to penal punishment? Is he curable or 
readjustable? These questions have nothing to do with article 
64, nor with the possible insanity of the convicted person at 
the moment of the act. They do not concern 
‘responsibility’ . They concern nothing but the 
administration of the penalty, its necessity, its usefulness, 



its possible effectiveness; they make it possible to show, in 
an almost transparent vocabulary, whether the mental hospital 
would be a more suitable place of confinement than the 
prison, whether this confinement should be short or long, 
whether medical treatment or security measures are called 
for. What, then, is the role of the psychiatrist in penal 
matters? He is not an expert in responsibility, but an 
adviser on punishment; it is up to him to say whether the 
subject is ‘dangerous’ , in what way one should be protected 
from him, how one should intervene to alter him, whether it 
would be better to try to force him into submission or to 
treat him. At the very beginning of its history, psychiatric 
expertise was called upon to formulate ‘true’ propositions 
as to the part that the liberty of the offender had played in 
the act he had committed; it is now called upon to suggest a 
prescription for what might be called his ‘medico-judicial 
treatment’ . 

To sum up, ever since the new penal system - that defined 
by the great codes of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
- has been in operation, a general process has led judges to 
judge something other than crimes; they have been led in 
their sentences to do something other than judge; and the 
power of judging has been transferred, in part, to other 
authorities than the judges of the offence. The whole penal 
operation has taken on extra-juridical elements and 
personnel. It will be said that there is nothing 
extraordinary in this, that it is part of the destiny of the 
law to absorb little by little elements that are alien to it. 
But what is odd about modern criminal justice is that, 
although it has taken on so many extra-juridical elements, it 
has done so not in order to be able to define them 
juridically and gradually to integrate them into the actual 
power to punish: on the contrary, it has done so in order to 
make them function within the penal operation as non~ 
juridical elements; in order to stop this operation being 
simply a legal punishment; in order to exculpate the judge 
from being purely and simply he who punishes. ‘Of course, we 



pass sentence, but this sentence is not in direct relation to 
the crime. It is quite clear that for us it functions as a 
way of treating a criminal. We punish, but this is a way of 
saying that we wish to obtain a cure.’ Today, criminal 
justice functions and justifies itself only by this perpetual 
reference to something other than itself, by this unceasing 
reinscription in non-juridical systems. Its fate is to be 
redefined by knowledge. 

Beneath the increasing leniency of punishment, then, one 
may map a displacement of its point of application; and 
through this displacement, a whole field of recent objects, a 
whole new system of truth and a mass of roles hitherto 
unknown in the exercise of criminal justice. A corpus of 
knowledge, techniques, ‘scientific’ discourses is formed 
and becomes entangled with the practice of the power to 
punish. 

This book is intended as a correlative history of the 
modern soul and of a new power to judge; a genealogy of the 
present scientifico-legal complex from which the power to 
punish derives its bases, justifications and rules, from 
which it extends its effects and by which it masks its 
exorbitant singularity. 

But from what point can such a history of the modern soul 
on trial be written? If one confined oneself to the evolution 
of legislation or of penal procedures, one would run the risk 
of allowing a change in the collective sensibility, an 
increase in humanization or the development of the human 
sciences to emerge as a massive, external, inert and primary 
fact. By studying only the general social forms, as Durkheim 
did (cf. Bibliography), one runs the risk of positing as the 
principle of greater leniency in punishment processes of 
individualization that are rather one of the effects of the 
new tactics of power, among which are to be included the new 
penal mechanisms. This study obeys four general rules: 

1. Do not concentrate the study of the punitive mechanisms 
on their ‘repressive’ effects alone, on their 
‘punishment’ aspects alone, but situate them in a whole 



series of their possible positive effects, even if these seem 
marginal at first sight. As a consequence, regard punishment 
as a complex social function. 

2. Analyse punitive methods not simply as consequences of 
legislation or as indicators of social structures, but as 
techniques possessing their own specificity in the more 
general field of other ways of exercising power. Regard 
punishment as a political tactic. 

3. Instead of treating the history of penal law and the 
history of the human sciences as two separate series whose 
overlapping appears to have had on one or the other, or 
perhaps on both, a disturbing or useful effect, according to 
one’ s point of view, see whether there is not some common 
matrix or whether they do not both derive from a single 
process of ‘epistemologico-juridical’ formation; in short, 
make the technology of power the very principle both of the 
humanization of the penal system and of the knowledge of man. 

4. Try to discover whether this entry of the soul on to the 
scene of penal justice, and with it the insertion in legal 
practice of a whole corpus of ‘scientific’ knowledge, is 
not the effect of a transformation of the way in which the 
body itself is invested by power relations. 

In short, try to study the metamorphosis of punitive 
methods on the basis of a political technology of the body in 
which might be read a common history of power relations and 
object relations. Thus, by an analysis of penal leniency as a 
technique of power, one might understand both how man, the 
soul, the normal or abnormal individual have come to 
duplicate crime as objects of penal intervention; and in what 
way a specific mode of subjection was able to give birth to 
man as an object of knowledge for a discourse with a 
‘scientific’ status. 

But I am not claiming to be the first to have worked in 
this direction. - 

Rusche and Kirchheimer’ s great work, Punishment and Social 
Structures, provides a number of essential reference points. 


We must first rid ourselves of the illusion that penality is 
above all (if not exclusively) a means of reducing crime and 
that, in this role, according to the social forms, the 
political systems or beliefs, it may be severe or lenient, 
tend towards expiation of obtaining redress, towards the 
pursuit of individuals or the attribution of collective 
responsibility. We must analyse rather the ‘concrete systems 
of punishment’ , study them as social phenomena that cannot 
be accounted for by the juridical structure of society alone, 
nor by its fundamental ethical choices; we must situate them 
in their field of operation, in which the punishment of crime 
is not the sole element; we must show that punitive measures 
are not simply ‘negative’ mechanisms that make it possible 
to repress, to prevent, to exclude, to eliminate; but that 
they are linked to a whole series of positive and useful 
effects which it is their task to support (and, in this 
sense, although legal punishment is carried out in order to 
punish offences, one might say that the definition of 
offences and their prosecution are carried out in turn in 
order to maintain the punitive mechanisms and their 
functions). From this point of view, Rusche and Kirchheimer 
relate the different systems of punishment with the systems 
of production within which they operate: thus, in a slave 
economy, punitive mechanisms serve to provide an additional 
labour force - and to constitute a body of ‘civil’ slaves 
in addition to those provided by war or trading; with 
feudalism, at a time when money and production were still at 
an early stage of development, we find a sudden increase in 
corporal punishments - the body being in most cases the only 
property accessible; the penitentiary (the Hopital General, 
the Spinhuis or the Rasphuis), forced labour and the prison 
factory appear with the development of the mercantile 
economy. But the industrial system requires a free market in 
labour and, in the nineteenth century, the role of forced 
labour in the mechanisms of punishment diminishes accordingly 
and ‘corrective’ detention takes its place. There are no 



doubt a number of observations to be made about such a strict 
correlation. 

But we can surely accept the general proposition that, in 
our societies, the systems of punishment are to be situated 
in a certain ‘political economy’ of the body: even if they 
do not make use of violent or bloody punishment, even when 
they use ‘lenient’ methods involving confinement or 
correction, it is always the body that is at issue - the 
body and its forces, their utility and their docility, their 
distribution and their submission. It is certainly legitimate 
to write a history of punishment against the background of 
moral ideas or legal structures. But can one write such a 
history against the background of a history of bodies, when 
such systems of punishment claim to have only the secret 
souls of criminals as their objective? 

Historians long ago began to write the history of the body. 
They have studied the body in the field of historical 
demography or pathology; they have considered it as the seat 
of needs and appetites, as the locus of physiological 
processes and metabolisms, as a target for the attacks of 
germs or viruses; they have shown to what extent historical 
processes were involved in what might seem to be the purely 
biological base of existence; and what place should be given 
in the history of society to biological ‘events’ such as 
the circulation of bacilli, or the extension of the life-span 
(cf. Le Roy-Ladurie). But the body is also directly involved 
in a political field; power relations have an immediate hold 
upon it; they invest it, mark it, train it, torture it, force 
it to carry out tasks, to perform ceremonies, to emit signs. 
This political investment of the body is bound up, in 
accordance with complex reciprocal relations, with its 
economic use; it is largely as a force of production that the 
body is invested with relations of power and domination; but, 
on the other hand, its constitution as labour power is 
possible only if it is caught up in a system of subjection 
(in which need is also a political instrument meticulously 
prepared, calculated and used); the body becomes a useful 



force only if it is both a productive body and a subjected 
body. This subjection is not only obtained by the instruments 
of violence or ideology; it can also be direct, physical, 
pitting force against force, bearing on material elements, 
and yet without involving violence; it may be calculated, 
organized, technically thought out; it may be subtle, make 
use neither of weapons nor of terror and yet remain of a 
physical order. That is to say, there may be a ‘knowledge’ 
of the body that is not exactly the science of its 
functioning, and a mastery of its forces that is more than 
the ability to conquer them: this knowledge and this mastery 
constitute what might be called the political technology of 
the body. Of course, this technology is diffuse, rarely 
formulated in continuous, systematic discourse; it is often 
made up of bits and pieces; it implements a disparate set of 
tools or methods. In spite of the coherence of its results, 
it is generally no more than a multiform instrumentation. 
Moreover, it cannot be localized in a particular type of 
institution or state apparatus. For they have recourse to it; 
they use, select or impose certain of its methods. But, in 
its mechanisms and its effects, it is situated at a quite 
different level. What the apparatuses and institutions 
operate is, in a sense, a micro-physics of power, whose field 
of validity is situated in a sense between these great 
functionings and the bodies themselves with their materiality 
and their forces. 

Now, the study of this micro-physics presupposes that the 
power exercised on the body is conceived not as a property, 
but as a strategy, that its effects of domination are 
attributed not to ‘appropriation’ , but to dispositions, 
manoeuvres, tactics, techniques, functionings; that one 
should decipher in it a network of relations, constantly in 
tension, in activity, rather than a privilege that one might 
possess; that one should take as its model a perpetual battle 
rather than a contract regulating a transaction or the 
conquest of a territory. In short this power is exercised 
rather than possessed; it is not the ‘privilege’ , acquired 



or preserved, of the dominant class, but the overall effect 
of its strategic positions - an effect that is manifested 
and sometimes extended by the position of those who are 
dominated. Furthermore, this power is not exercised simply as 
an obligation or a prohibition on those who ‘do not have 
it’ ; it invests them, is transmitted by them and through 
them; it exerts pressure upon them, just as they themselves, 
in their struggle against it, resist the grip it has on them. 
This means that these relations go right down into the depths 
of society, that they are not localized in the relations 
between the state and its citizens or on the frontier between 
classes and that they do not merely reproduce, at the level 
of individuals, bodies, gestures and behaviour, the general 
form of the law or government; that, although there is 
continuity (they are indeed articulated on this form through 
a whole series of complex mechanisms), there is neither 
analogy nor homology, but a specificity of mechanism and 
modality. Lastly, they are not univocal; they define 
innumerable points of confrontation, focuses of instability, 
each of which has its own risks of conflict, of struggles, 
and of an at least temporary inversion of the power 
relations. The overthrow of these ‘micro-powers’ does not, 
then, obey the law of all or nothing; it is not acquired once 
and for all by a new control of the apparatuses nor by a new 
functioning or a destruction of the institutions; on the 
other hand, none of its localized episodes may be inscribed 
in history except by the effects that it induces on the 
entire network in which it is caught up. 

Perhaps, too, we should abandon a whole tradition that 
allows us to imagine that knowledge can exist only where the 
power relations are suspended and that knowledge can develop 
only outside its injunctions, its demands and its interests. 
Perhaps we should abandon the belief that power makes mad and 
that, by the same token, the renunciation of power is one of 
the conditions of knowledge. We should admit rather that 
power produces knowledge (and not simply by encouraging it 
because it serves power or by applying it because it is 



useful); that power and knowledge directly imply one another; 
that there is no power relation without the correlative 
constitution of a field of knowledge, nor any knowledge that 
does not presuppose and constitute at the same time power 
relations. These ‘power-knowledge relations’ are to be 
analysed, therefore, not on the basis of a subject of 
knowledge who is or is not free in relation to the power 
system, but, on the contrary, the subject who knows, the 
objects to be known and the modalities of knowledge must be 
regarded as so many effects of these fundamental implications 
of power-knowledge and their historical transformations. In 
short, it is not the activity of the subject of knowledge 
that produces a corpus of knowledge, useful or resistant to 
power, but power-knowledge, the processes and struggles that 
traverse it and of which it is made up, that determines the 
forms and possible domains of knowledge. 

To analyse the political investment of the body and the 
microphysics of power presupposes, therefore, that one 
abandons - where power is concerned - the violence - 
ideology opposition, the metaphor of property, the model of 
the contract or of conquest; that - where knowledge is 
concerned - one abandons the opposition between what is 
‘interested’ and what is ‘disinterested’ , the model of 
knowledge and the primacy of the subject. Borrowing a word 
from Petty and his contemporaries, but giving it a different 
meaning from the one current in the seventeenth century, one 
might imagine a political ‘anatomy’ . This would not be the 
study of a state in terms of a ‘body’ (with its elements, 
its resources and its forces), nor would it be the study of 
the body and its surroundings in terms of a small state. One 
would be concerned with the ‘body politic’ , as a set of 
material elements and techniques that serve as weapons, 
relays, communication routes and supports for the power and 
knowledge relations that invest human bodies and subjugate 
them by turning them into objects of knowledge. 

It is a question of situating the techniques of punishment 
- whether they seize the body in the ritual of public 



torture and execution or whether they are addressed to the 
soul - in the history of this body politic; of considering 
penal practices less as a consequence of legal theories than 
as a chapter of political anatomy. 

Kantorowitz gives a remarkable analysis of ‘The King’ s 
Body’ : a double body according to the juridical theology of 
the Middle Ages, since it involves not only the transitory 
element that is born and dies, but another that remains 
unchanged by time and is maintained as the physical yet 
intangible support of the kingdom; around this duality, which 
was originally close to the Christological model, are 
organized an iconography, a political theory of monarchy, 
legal mechanisms that distinguish between as well as link the 
person of the king and the demands of the Crown, and a whole 
ritual that reaches its height in the coronation, the funeral 
and the ceremonies of submission. At the opposite pole one 
might imagine placing the body of the condemned man; he, too, 
has his legal status; he gives rise to his own ceremonial and 
he calls forth a whole theoretical discourse, not in order to 
ground the ‘surplus power’ possessed by the person of the 
sovereign, but in order to code the ‘lack of power’ with 
which those subjected to punishment are marked. In the 
darkest region of the political field the condemned man 
represents the symmetrical, inverted figure of the king. We 
should analyse what might be called, in homage to 
Kantorowitz, ‘the least body of the condemned man’ . 

If the surplus power possessed by the king gives rise to 
the duplication of his body, has not the surplus power 
exercised on the subjected body of the condemned man given 
rise to another type of duplication? That of a ‘non¬ 
corporal’ , a ‘soul’ , as Mably called it. The history of 
this ‘micro-physics’ of the punitive power would then be a 
genealogy or an element in a genealogy of the modern 
‘soul’ . Rather than seeing this soul as the reactivated 
remnants of an ideology, one would see it as the present 
correlative of a certain technology of power over the body. 

It would be wrong to say that the soul is an illusion, or an 



ideological effect. On the contrary, it exists, it has a 
reality, it is produced permanently around, on, within the 
body by the functioning of a power that is exercised on those 
punished - and, in a more general way, on those one 
supervises, trains and corrects, over madmen, children at 
home and at school, the colonized, over those who are stuck 
at a machine and supervised for the rest of their lives. This 
is the historical reality of this soul, which, unlike the 
soul represented by Christian theology, is not born in sin 
and subject to punishment, but is born rather out of methods 
of punishment, supervision and constraint. This real, non¬ 
corporal soul is not a substance; it is the element in which 
are articulated the effects of a certain type of power and 
the reference of a certain type of knowledge, the machinery 
by which the power relations give rise to a possible corpus 
of knowledge, and knowledge extends and reinforces the 
effects of this power. On this reality-reference, various 
concepts have been constructed and domains of analysis carved 
out: psyche, subjectivity, personality, consciousness, etc.; 
on it have been built scientific techniques and discourses, 
and the moral claims of humanism. But let there be no 
misunderstanding: it is not that a real man, the object of 
knowledge, philosophical reflection or technical 
intervention, has been substituted for the soul, the illusion 
of the theologians. The man described for us, whom we are 
invited to free, is already in himself the effect of a 
subjection much more profound than himself. A ‘soul’ 
inhabits him and brings him to existence, which is itself a 
factor in the mastery that power exercises over the body. The 
soul is the effect and instrument of a political anatomy; the 
soul is the prison of the body. 

That punishment in general and the prison in particular 
belong to a political technology of the body is a lesson that 
I have learnt not so much from history as from the present. 

In recent years, prison revolts have occurred throughout the 
world. There was certainly something paradoxical about their 



aims, their slogans and the way they took place. They were 
revolts against an entire state of physical misery that is 
over a century old: against cold, suffocation and 
overcrowding, against decrepit walls, hunger, physical 
maltreatment. But they were also revolts against model 
prisons, tranquillizers, isolation, the medical or 
educational services. Were they revolts whose aims were 
merely material? Or contradictory revolts: against the 
obsolete, but also against comfort; against the warders, but 
also against the psychiatrists? In fact, all these movements 
- and the innumerable discourses that the prison has given 
rise to since the early nineteenth century - have been about 
the body and material things. What has sustained these 
discourses, these memories and invectives are indeed those 
minute material details. One may, if one is so disposed, see 
them as no more than blind demands or suspect the existence 
behind them of alien strategies. In fact, they were revolts, 
at the level of the body, against the very body of the 
prison. What was at issue was not whether the prison 
environment was too harsh or too aseptic, too primitive or 
too efficient, but its very materiality as an instrument and 
vector of power; it is this whole technology of power over 
the body that the technology of the ‘soul’ - that of the 
educationalists, psychologists and psychiatrists - fails 
either to conceal or to compensate, for the simple reason 
that it is one of its tools. I would like to write the 
history of this prison, with all the political investments of 
the body that it gathers together in its closed architecture. 
Why? Simply because I am interested in the past? No, if one 
means by that writing a history of the past in terms of the 
present. Yes, if one means writing the history of the 
present. - 


2. The spectacle of the scaffold 


The ordinance of 1670 regulated the general forms of penal 
practice up to the Revolution. It laid down the following 
hierarchy of penalties: ‘Death, judicial torture pending 
proof, penal servitude, flogging, amende honorable, 
banishment. ’ A high proportion of physical punishment. 
Customs, the nature of the crimes, the status of the 
condemned accounted for still more variations. ‘Capital 
punishment comprises many kinds of death: some prisoners may 
be condemned to be hanged, others to having their hands cut 
off or their tongues cut out or pierced and then to be 
hanged; others, for more serious crimes, to be broken alive 
and to die on the wheel, after having their limbs broken; 
others to be broken until they die a natural death, others to 
be strangled and then broken, others to be burnt alive, 
others to be burnt after first being strangled; others to be 
drawn by four horses, others to have their heads cut off, and 
others to have their heads broken’ (Soulatges, 169-71). And 
Soulatges adds, almost in passing, that there are also 
lighter penalties not mentioned by the ordinance: 
satisfaction to the injured party, warning, reprimand, a 
short period of imprisonment, prohibition from entering a 
certain area and, lastly, pecuniary punishments - fines or 
confiscation. 

But we must not be misled. There was a considerable gap 
between this arsenal of horrors and everyday penal practice. 
Public torture and execution was by no means the most 
frequent form of punishment. To us today the proportion of 
death sentences in the penal practice of the classical age 



may seem high: at the Chatelet 1 - during the period 1755 - 85 
under 10 per cent of the sentences passed involved capital 
punishment: the wheel, the gallows or the stake (Petrovitch, 
226ff); the Parlement of Flanders passed thirty-nine death 
sentences, out of a total of 260 sentences, between 1721 and 
1730 (and twenty-six out of 500 between 1781 and 1790 - cf. 
Dautricourt). But it must not be forgotten that the courts 
found many ways of relaxing the rigours of the penal system, 
either by refusing to prosecute offences that were too 
heavily punished or by modifying the definition of the crime; 
sometimes too the royal power indicated that some 
particularly severe ordinance was not to be applied too 
strictly (which was how Choiseul dealt with the declaration 
of 3 August 1744 on vagabonds - Choiseul, 128-9). In any 
case, the majority of the sentences involved banishment or 
fines: in a court such as that of the Chatelet (which dealt 
only with relatively serious offences), banishment 
represented over half the sentences passed between 1755 and 
1785. But many of these non-corporal penalties were 
accompanied by additional penalties that involved a degree of 
torture: public exhibition, pillory, carcan, flogging, 
branding; this was the case for all sentences to the 
‘galleys’ or to what was the equivalent for women - 
reclusion in the hospital; banishment was often preceded by 
public exhibition and branding; fines were sometimes 
accompanied by flogging. It was not only in the great solemn 
executions, but also in this additional form of punishment, 
that torture revealed the significant part it played in 
penality: every penalty of a certain seriousness had to 
involve an element of torture, of supplice. 

What is a supplice ? ‘Corporal punishment, painful to a 
more or less horrible degree,’ said Jaucourt in his 
Encyclopedic article and added: ‘It is an inexplicable 
phenomenon that the extension of man’ s imagination creates 
out of the barbarous and the cruel.’ Inexplicable, perhaps, 
but certainly neither irregular nor primitive. Torture is a 
technique; it is not an extreme expression of lawless rage. 


To be torture, punishment must obey three principal criteria: 
first, it must produce a certain degree of pain, which may be 
measured exactly, or at least calculated, compared and 
hierarchized; death is a torture in so far as it is not 

simply a withdrawal of the right to live, but is the occasion 

and the culmination of a calculated gradation of pain: from 

decapitation (which reduces all pain to a single gesture, 

performed in a single moment - the zero degree of torture), 
through hanging, the stake and the wheel (all of which 
prolong the agony), to quartering, which carries pain almost 
to infinity; death-torture is the art of maintaining life in 
pain, by subdividing it into a ‘thousand deaths’ , by 
achieving before life ceases ‘the most exquisite agonies’ 

(cf. Ollyffe). Torture rests on a whole quantitative art of 
pain. But there is more to it: this production of pain is 
regulated. Torture correlates the type of corporal effect, 
the quality, intensity, duration of pain, with the gravity of 
the crime, the person of the criminal, the rank of his 
victims. There is a legal code of pain; when it involves 
torture, punishment does not fall upon the body 
indiscriminately or equally; it is calculated according to 
detailed rules: the number of lashes of the whip, the 
positioning of the branding iron, the duration of the death 
agony on the stake or the wheel (the court decides whether 
the criminal is to be strangled at once or allowed to die 
slowly, and the points at which this gesture of pity must 
occur), the type of mutilation to be used (hand cut off, lips 
or tongue pierced). All these various elements multiply the 
punishments and are combined according to the court and the 
crime. ‘The poetry of Dante put into laws, ’ was how Rossi 
described it; a long course in physico-penal knowledge, in 
any case. Furthermore, torture forms part of a ritual. It is 
an element in the liturgy of punishment and meets two 
demands. It must mark the victim: it is intended, either by 
the scar it leaves on the body, or by the spectacle that 
accompanies it, to brand the victim with infamy; even if its 
function is to ‘purge’ the crime, torture does not 



reconcile; it traces around or, rather, on the very body of 
the condemned man signs that must not be effaced; in any 
case, men will remember public exhibition, the pillory, 
torture and pain duly observed. And, from the point of view 
of the law that imposes it, public torture and execution must 
be spectacular, it must be seen by all almost as its triumph. 
The very excess of the violence employed is one of the 
elements of its glory: the fact that the guilty man should 
moan and cry out under the blows is not a shameful side- 
effect, it is the very ceremonial of justice being expressed 
in all its force. Hence no doubt those tortures that take 
place even after death: corpses burnt, ashes thrown to the 
winds, bodies dragged on hurdles and exhibited at the 
roadside. Justice pursues the body beyond all possible pain. 

The term ‘penal torture’ does not cover any corporal 
punishment: it is a differentiated production of pain, an 
organized ritual for the marking of victims and the 
expression of the power that punishes; not the expression of 
a legal system driven to exasperation and, forgetting its 
principles, losing all restraint. In the ‘excesses’ of 
torture, a whole economy of power is invested. 

The tortured body is first inscribed in the legal 
ceremonial that must produce, open for all to see, the truth 
of the crime. 

In France, as in most European countries, with the notable 
exception of England, the entire criminal procedure, right up 
to the sentence, remained secret: that is to say, opaque, not 
only to the public but also to the accused himself. It took 
place without him, or at least without his having any 
knowledge either of the charges or of the evidence. In the 
order of criminal justice, knowledge was the absolute 
privilege of the prosecution. The preliminary investigation 
was carried out ‘as diligently and secretly as may be’ , as 
the edict of 1498 put it. According to the ordinance of 1670, 
which confirmed and, on certain points, reinforced the 
severity of the preceding period, it was impossible for the 



accused to have access to the documents of the case, 
impossible to know the identity of his accusers, impossible 
to know the nature of the evidence before objecting to 
witnesses, impossible to make use, until the last moments of 
the trial, of the documents in proof, impossible to have a 
lawyer, either to ensure the proper conduct of the case, or 
to take part, on the mainissue, in the defence. The 
magistrate, for his part, had the right to accept anonymous 
denunciations, to conceal from the accused the nature of the 
action, to question him with a view to catching him out, to 
use insinuations. (Up to the eighteenth century, lengthy 
arguments took place as to whether, in the course of 
‘captious’ questioning, it was lawful for the judge to use 
false promises, lies, words with double meaning - a whole 
casuistry of legal bad faith. ) The magistrate constituted, in 
solitary omnipotence, a truth by which he invested the 
accused; and the judges received this truth ready made, in 
the form of documents and written statements; for them, these 
factors alone were proof; they met the accused only once in 
order to question him before passing sentence. The secret and 
written form of the procedure reflects the principle that in 
criminal matters the establishment of truth was the absolute 
right and the exclusive power of the sovereign and his 
judges. Ayrault supposed that this procedure (which was more 
or less established by the sixteenth century) originated in 
‘the fear of the uproar, shouting and cheering that the 
people usually indulge in, the fear that there would be 
disorder, violence, and outbursts against the parties, or 
even against the judges’ ; the king wished to show in this 
that the ‘sovereign power’ from which the right to punish 
derived could in no case belong to the ‘multitude’ (cf. 
Ayrault, LIII, chapters LXXII and LXIX). Before the justice 
of the sovereign, all voices must be still. 

Yet, despite the use of secrecy, certain rules had to be 
obeyed in establishing the truth. Secrecy itself required 
that a rigorous model of penal truth be defined. A whole 
tradition dating from the Middle Ages and considerably 



developed by the great lawyers of the Renaissance laid down 
what the nature and the use of evidence might be. Even in the 
eighteenth century, it was still common to meet distinctions 
like the following: true, direct, or legitimate proof (that 
provided by witnesses, for example) and indirect, 
conjectural, artificial proof (obtained by argument); or, 
again, manifest proof, considerable proof, imperfect or 
slight (Jousse, 660); or, again, ‘urgent or necessary’ 
proof that did not allow one to doubt the truth of the deed 
(this was ‘full’ proof: thus two irreproachable witnesses 
affirming that they saw the accused, carrying an unsheathed 
and bloody sword, leave the place where, some time later, the 
body of the dead man was found with stab wounds); approximate 
or semi-full proof, which may be regarded as true as long as 
the accused does not destroy it with evidence to the contrary 
(the evidence of a single eye-witness or death threats 
preceding a murder); lastly, distant or ' adminicule' clues, 

which consisted only of opinion (rumour, the flight of the 
suspect, his manner when questioned, etc. - Muyart de 
Vouglans, 1757, 345 - 7). Now, these distinctions are not 
simply theoretical subtleties. They have an operational 
function. First, because each of these kinds of evidence, 
taken in isolation, may have a particular type of judicial 
effect: ‘full’ proof may lead to any sentence; ‘semi¬ 

full’ proof may lead to any of the ‘peines afflictives’ , 
or heavy penalties, except death; imperfect and slight clues 
are enough for the suspect to have a writ issued against him, 
to have the case deferred for further inquiry or to have a 
fine imposed on him. Secondly, because they are combined 
according to precise arithmetical rules: two ‘semi-full’ 
proofs may make a complete proof; ‘ adminicules’ , providing 
there are several of them and they concur, may be combined to 
form a semi-proof; but, however many there may be of them, 
they can never, of themselves, constitute a complete proof. 

We have, then, a penal arithmetic that is meticulous on many 
points, but which still leaves a margin for a good deal of 
argument: in order for a capital sentence to be passed, is a 



single full proof enough or must it be accompanied by other 
slighter clues? Are two approximate proofs always equivalent 
to a full proof? Should not three be required or two plus 
distant clues? Are there elements that may be regarded as 
clues only for certain crimes, in certain circumstances and 
in relation to certain persons (thus evidence is disregarded 
if it comes from a vagabond; it is reinforced, on the 
contrary, if it is provided by ‘a considerable person’ or 
by a master in the case of a domestic offence). It is an 
arithmetic modulated by casuistry, whose function is to 
define how a legal proof is to be constructed. On the one 
hand, this system of ‘legal proofs’ makes truth in the 
penal domain the result of a complex art; it obeys rules 
known only to specialists, and, consequently, it reinforces 
the principle of secrecy. ‘It is not enough that the judge 
should have the conviction that any reasonable man may have 
••• Nothing is more incorrect than this way of judging, which, 
in truth, is no other than a more or less well-founded 
opinion. ’ But, on the other hand, it is a severe constraint 
for the magistrate; in the absence of this regularity, 

‘every sentence would be reckless, and in a sense it may be 
said that it is unjust even when, in truth, the accused is 
guilty’ (Poullain du Parc, 112-13 - see also Esmein, 260 - 
83 and Mittermaier, 15-19). The day will come when the 
singularity of this judicial truth will appear scandalous: as 
if the law did not have to obey the rules of common truth. 

‘What would be said of a semi-proof in the sciences capable 
of demonstration? What would a geometrical or algebraic semi¬ 
proof amount to?’ (Seigneux de Correvon, 63). But it should 
not be forgotten that these formal constraints on legal proof 
were a mode of regulation internal to absolute power and 
exclusive of knowledge. 

Written, secret, subjected, in order to construct its 
proofs, to rigorous rules, the penal investigation was a 
machine that might produce the truth in the absence of the 
accused. And by this very fact, though the law strictly 
speaking did not require it, this procedure was to tend 



necessarily to the confession. And for two reasons: first, 
because the confession constituted so strong a proof that 
there was scarcely any need to add others, or to enter the 
difficult and dubious combinatory of clues; the confession, 
provided it was obtained in the correct manner, almost 
discharged the prosecution of the obligation to provide 
further evidence (in any case, the most difficult evidence). 
Secondly, the only way that this procedure might use all its 
unequivocal authority, and become a real victory over the 
accused, the only way in which the truth might exert all its 
power, was for the criminal to accept responsibility for his 
own crime and himself sign what had been skilfully and 
obscurely constructed by the preliminary investigation. ‘It 
is not enough’ , as Ayrault, who did not care for these 
secret procedures, remarked, ‘that wrong-doers be justly 
punished. They must if possible judge and condemn 
themselves’ (Ayrault, 1. I, chapter 14). Within the crime 
reconstituted by writing, the criminal who confessed came to 
play the role of living truth. The confession, an act of the 
criminal, responsible and speaking subject, was the 
complement to the written, secret preliminary investigation. 
Hence the importance that all this procedure of an 
inquisitorial type accorded to the confession. 

Hence, too, the ambiguities of its role. On the one hand, 
an attempt was made to introduce it into the general 
arithmetic of evidence; it was stressed that it was no more 
than one proof among many. It was not the evidentia rei\ nor 
was it the strongest of the proofs, it was not in itself 
enough to bring conviction, it had to be accompanied by 
additional, circumstantial evidence; for it is a well-known 
fact that the accused sometimes declare themselves to be 
guilty of crimes that they have not committed; the examining 
magistrate had therefore to carry out additional 
investigations if he possessed no more than the confession of 
the accused. But, on the other hand, the confession had 
priority over any other kind of evidence. To a certain 
extent, it transcended all other evidence; an element in the 



calculation of the truth, it was also the act by which the 
accused accepted the charge and recognized its truth; it 
transformed an investigation carried out without him into a 
voluntary affirmation. Through the confession, the accused 
himself took part in the ritual of producing penal truth. As 
medieval law put it, the confession ‘renders the thing 
notorious and manifest’ . To this first ambiguity was added a 
second: as a particularly strong proof, requiring for a 
conviction only a few additional clues, thus reducing to the 
minimum the work of investigation and the mechanics of 
demonstration, the confession was therefore highly valued; 
every possible coercion would be used to obtain it. But, 
although it had to be, in the procedure, the living and oral 
counterpart of the written preliminary investigation, 
although it had to be its reply, its authentication, as it 
were, on the part of the accused, it had to be surrounded by 
guarantees and formalities. It preserved something of a 
transaction: that is why it had to be ‘spontaneous’ , why it 
had to be formulated before the competent court, why it had 
to be made in full consciousness, why it should not concern 
impossible things, etc. - Through the confession, the accused 
committed himself to the procedure; he signed the truth of 
the preliminary investigation. 

This double ambiguity of the confession (an element of 
proof and the counterpart of preliminary investigation; the 
effect of constraint and a semi-voluntary transaction) 
explains the two great means used by classical criminal law 
to obtain it: the oath that the accused was asked to make 
before his interrogatory (and therefore under threat of 
perjury before both human and divine justice; and, at the 
same time, a ritual act of commitment); judicial torture 
(physical violence to obtain truth, which, in any case, had 
then to be repeated before the judges, as a ‘spontaneous’ 
confession, if it were to constitute proof). At the end of 
the eighteenth century, torture was to be denounced as a 
survival of the barbarities of another age: the mark of a 
savagery that was denounced as ‘Gothic’ . It is true that 


the practice of torture is of ancient origin: it goes back at 
least as far as the Inquisition, of course, and probably to 
the torture of slaves. But it did not figure in classical law 
as a survival or defect. It occupied a strict place in a 
complex penal mechanism, in which the procedure of an 
inquisitorial type was reinforced with elements of the 
accusatory system; in which the written demonstration 
required an oral correlative; in which the techniques of 
proof administered by the magistrates were mingled with the 
methods of the ordeal to which the accused was challenged; in 
which he was called upon - if necessary by the most violent 
persuasion - to play the role of voluntary partner in the 
procedure; in which it was a question, in short, of producing 
truth by a mechanism consisting of two elements - that of 
the investigation carried out in secret by the judicial 
authority and that of the act ritually performed by the 
accused. The body of the accused, the speaking and, if 
necessary, suffering body, assured the interlocking of these 
two mechanisms; that is why, until the classical system of 
punishment was re-examined from top to bottom, there were so 
few radical criticisms of torture (the most famous being 
Nicolas’ s Si la torture est un mo yen a verifier les crimes 
of 1682). Much more frequent were simple recommendations of 
prudence: ‘Judicial torture is a dangerous means of arriving 

at knowledge of the truth; that is why judges must not resort 
to it without due consideration. Nothing is more equivocal. 
There are guilty men who have enough firmness to hide a true 
crime ••• and innocent victims who are made to confess crimes 
of which they were not guilty’ (Ferriere, 612). 

On this basis one may see the functioning of judicial 
torture, or interrogation under torture, as a torture of the 
truth. To begin with, judicial torture was not a way of 
obtaining the truth at all costs; it was not the unrestrained 
torture of modern interrogations; it was certainly cruel, but 
it was not savage. It was a regulated practice, obeying a 
well-defined procedure; the various stages, their duration, 
the instruments used, the length of ropes and the heaviness 



of the weights used, the number of interventions made by the 
interrogating magistrate, all this was, according to the 
different local practices, carefully codified. (In 1729, 
Aguesseau ordered an investigation into the means and rules 
of torture used in France. For a summary of the findings, cf. 
Joly de Fleury, 322 - 8.) Torture was a strict judicial game. 
And, as such, it was linked to the old tests or trials - 
ordeals, judicial duels, judgements of God - that were 
practised in accusatory procedures long before the techniques 
of the Inquisition. Something of the joust survived, between 
the judge who ordered the judicial torture and the suspect 
who was tortured; the ‘patient’ - this is the term used to 
designate the victim - was subjected to a series of trials, 
graduated in severity, in which he succeeded if he ‘held 
out’ , or failed if he confessed. (The first degree of 
torture was the sight of the instruments. In the case of 
children or of persons over the age of seventy, one did not 
go beyond this stage. ) But the examining magistrate did not 
employ torture without himself taking certain risks (apart, 
that is, from the danger of causing the suspect’ s death); he 
had a stake in the game, namely, the evidence that he had 
already collected; for the rule was that if the accused 
‘held out’ and did not confess, the magistrate was forced 
to drop the charges. The tortured man had then won. Hence the 
custom, which had been introduced for the most serious cases, 
of imposing judicial torture ‘pending proof’ : in this case 
the magistrate could continue with his investigation after 
the torture had failed; the suspect was not declared innocent 
by his resistance; but at least his victory saved him from 
being condemned to death. The judge kept all his cards, 
except the principal one. Omnia citra mortem. Hence the 
recommendation often made to magistrates, in the case of the 
most serious crimes, not to subject to judicial torture a 
suspect against whom the evidence was sufficiently convincing 
for, if he managed to resist the torture, the magistrate 
would no longer have the right to pass the death sentence, 
which he nevertheless deserved; in such a joust, justice 



would be the loser: if the evidence was sufficient ‘to 
condemn such a guilty person to death’ , one should not 
‘leave the conviction to chance and to the outcome of a 
provisional interrogation that often leads to nothing; for it 
is in the interest of public safety to make examples of 
grave, horrible and capital crimes’ (Rousseaud de la Combe, 
503). 

Beneath an apparently determined, impatient search for 
truth, one finds in classical torture the regulated mechanism 
of an ordeal: a physical challenge that must define the 
truth; if the patient is guilty, the pains that it imposes 
are not unjust; but it is also a mark of exculpation if he is 
innocent. In the practice of torture, pain, confrontation and 
truth were bound together: they worked together on the 
patient’ s body. The search for truth through judicial 
torture was certainly a way of obtaining evidence, the most 
serious of all - the confession of the guilty person; but it 
was also the battle, and this victory of one adversary over 
the other, that ‘produced’ truth according to a ritual. In 
torture employed to extract a confession, there was an 
element of the investigation; there also was an element of 
the duel. 

It is as if investigation and punishment had become mixed. 
And this is not the least paradoxical thing about it. 

Judicial torture was indeed defined as a way of complementing 
the demonstration when ‘there are not sufficient penalties 
in the trial’ . For it was included among the penalties; it 
was a penalty so grave that, in the hierarchy of punishments, 
the ordinance of 1760 placed it immediately after death. How 
can a penalty be used as a means? one was later to ask. How 
can one treat as a punishment what ought to be a method of 
demonstration? The reason is to be found in the way in which 
criminal justice, in the classical period, operated the 
production of truth. The different pieces of evidence did not 
constitute so many neutral elements, until such time as they 
could be gathered together into a single body of evidence 
that would bring the final certainty of guilt. Each piece of 



evidence aroused a particular degree of abomination. Guilt 
did not begin when all the evidence was gathered together; 
piece by piece, it was constituted by each of the elements 
that made it possible to recognize a guilty person. Thus a 
semi-proof did not leave the suspect innocent until such time 
as it was completed; it made him semi-guilty; slight evidence 
of a serious crime marked someone as slightly criminal. In 
short, penal demonstration did not obey a dualistic system: 
true or false; but a principle of continuous gradation; a 
degree reached in the demonstration already formed a degree 
of guilt and consequently involved a degree of punishment. 

The suspect, as such, always deserved a certain punishment; 
one could not be the object of suspicion and be completely 
innocent. Suspicion implied an element of demonstration as 
regards the judge, the mark of a certain degree of guilt as 
regards the suspect and a limited form of penalty as regards 
punishment. A suspect, who remained a suspect, was not for 
all that declared innocent, but was partially punished. When 
one reached a certain degree of presumption, one could then 
legitimately bring into play a practice that had a dual role: 
to begin the punishment in pursuance of the information 
already collected and to make use of this first stage of 
punishment in order to extort the truth that was still 
missing. In the eighteenth century, judicial torture 
functioned in that strange economy in which the ritual that 
produced the truth went side by side with the ritual that 
imposed the punishment. The body interrogated in torture 
constituted the point of application of the punishment and 
the locus of extortion of the truth. And just as presumption 
was inseparably an element in the investigation and a 
fragment of guilt, the regulated pain involved in judicial 
torture was a means both of punishment and of investigation. 

Now, curiously enough, this interlocking of the two rituals 
through the body continued, evidence having been confirmed 
and sentence passed, in the actual carrying out of the 
penalty; and the body of the condemned man was once again an 



essential element in the ceremonial of public punishment. It 
was the task of the guilty man to bear openly his 
condemnation and the truth of the crime that he had 
committed. His body, displayed, exhibited in procession, 
tortured, served as the public support of a procedure that 
had hitherto remained in the shade; in him, on him, the 
sentence had to be legible for all. This immediate, striking 
manifestation of the truth in the public implementation of 
penalties assumed, in the eighteenth century, several 
aspects. 

1. It made the guilty man the herald of his own 
condemnation. He was given the task, in a sense, of 
proclaiming it and thus attesting to the truth of what he had 
been charged with: the procession through the streets, the 
placard attached to his back, chest or head as a reminder of 
the sentence; the halts at various crossroads, the reading of 
the sentence, the amende honorable performed at the doors of 
churches, in which the condemned man solemnly acknowledged 
his crime: ‘Barefoot, wearing a shirt, carrying a torch, 
kneeling, to say and to declare that wickedly, horribly, 
treacherously, he has committed the most detestable crime, 
etc. ’ ; exhibition at a stake where his deeds and the 
sentence were read out; yet another reading of the sentence 
at the foot of the scaffold; whether he was to go simply to 
the pillory or to the stake and the wheel, the condemned man 
published his crime and the justice that had been meted out 
to him by bearing them physically on his body. 

2. It took up once again the scene of the confession. It 
duplicated the forced proclamation of the amende honorable 
with a spontaneous, public acknowledgement. It established 
the public execution as the moment of truth. These last 
moments, when the guilty man no longer has anything to lose, 
are won for the full light of truth. After the passing of the 
sentence, the court could decide on some new torture to 
obtain the names of possible accomplices. It was also 
recognized that at the very moment he mounted the scaffold 
the condemned man could ask for a respite in order to make 



new revelations. The public expected this new turn in the 
course of truth. Many made use of it in order to gain time, 
as did Michel Barbier, found guilty of armed assault: ‘He 
stared impudently at the scaffold and said that it had 
certainly not been set up for him, since he was innocent; he 
first asked to return to the chamber, where he beat about the 
bush for half an hour, still trying to justify himself; then, 
when he was sent back to execution, he ascended the scaffold 
with a purposeful air, but, when he saw himself undressed and 
tied to the cross before being stretched, he asked to go back 
to the chamber a second time and there made a full confession 
of his crimes and even declared that he was guilty of another 
murder’ (Hardy, IV, 80). The function of the public torture 
and execution was to reveal the truth; and in this respect it 
continued, in the public eye, the work of the judicial 
torture conducted in private. It added to the conviction the 
signature of the convicted man. A successful public execution 
justified justice, in that it published the truth of the 
crime in the very body of the man to be executed. An example 
of the good condemned man was Francois Billiard, a senior 
postal official, who murdered his wife in 1772. The 
executioner wanted to hide his face to spare him the insults 
of the crowd: ‘ “This punishment, which I have merited, has 
not been inflicted upon me, ” he said, “so that I should not 
be seen by the public •••” He was still wearing mourning 
dress in honour of his wife ••• He was wearing new shoes, his 
hair had been recently curled and powdered, and he had a 
countenance so modest and so dignified that those present who 
found themselves observing him more closely said that he must 
be the most perfect Christian or the greatest of all 
hypocrites. The placard that he was wearing on his chest had 
gone askew, and it was noticed that he had straightened it 
himself, no doubt so that people could read it the more 
easily’ (Hardy, I, 327). If each of the participants played 
his role well, the penal ceremony had the effectiveness of a 
long public confession. 



3. It pinned the public torture on to the crime itself; it 
established from one to the other a series of decipherable 
relations. It was an exhibition of the corpse of the 
condemned man at the scene of his crime, or at one of the 
near-by crossroads. The execution was often carried out at 
the very place where the crime had been committed - as in 
the case of the student who, in 1723, had killed several 
persons and for whom the presidial court of Nantes decided to 
set up a scaffold in front of the inn where he had committed 
his murders (Nantes, F. F. 124; cf. Parfouru, XXV). There was 
the use of ‘symbolic’ torture in which the forms of the 
execution referred to the nature of the crime: the tongues of 
blasphemers were pierced, the impure were burnt, the right 
hand of murderers was cut off; sometimes the condemned man 
was made to carry the instrument of his crime - thus Damiens 
was made to hold in his guilty right hand the famous dagger 
with which he had committed the crime, hand and dagger being 
smeared with sulphur and burnt together. As Vico remarked, 
this old jurisprudence was ‘an entire poetics’ . 

There were even some cases of an almost theatrical 
reproduction of the crime in the execution of the guilty man 
- with the same instruments, the same gestures. Thus justice 
had the crime re-enacted before the eyes of all, publishing 
it in its truth and at the same time annulling it in the 
death of the guilty man. Even as late in the eighteenth 
century as 1772, one finds sentences like the following: a 
servant girl at Cambrai, having killed her mistress, was 
condemned to be taken to the place of her execution in a cart 
‘used to collect rubbish at the crossroads’ ; there a gibbet 
was to be set up ‘at the foot of which will be placed the 
same chair in which the said Laleu, her mistress, was sitting 
at the time of the murder; and having seated the criminal 
there, the executioner of the High Court of Justice will cut 
off her right hand, throw it in her presence into the fire, 
and, immediately afterwards, will strike her four blows with 
the cleaver with which she murdered the said Laleu, the first 
and second being on the head, the third on the left forearm 



and the fourth on the chest; this done, she will be hung and 
strangled on the said gibbet until she be dead; and when two 
hours have elapsed her dead body will be removed and the head 
separated from it at the foot of the said gibbet on the said 
scaffold, with the same cleaver she used to murder her 
mistress, and the same head exhibited on a pole twenty feet 
high outside the gates of the said Cambrai, within reach of 
the road that leads to Douai, and the rest of the body put in 
a sack, and buried near the said pole at a depth of ten 
feet’ (quoted in Dautricourt, 269 - 70). 

4. Lastly, the slowness of the process of torture and 
execution, its sudden dramatic moments, the cries and 
sufferings of the condemned man serve as an ultimate proof at 
the end of the judicial ritual. Every death agony expresses a 
certain truth: but, when it takes place on the scaffold, it 
does so with more intensity, in that it is hastened by pain; 
with more rigour, because it occurs exactly at the juncture 
between the judgement of men and the judgement of God; with 
more ostentation, because it takes place in public. The 
sufferings of the condemned man are an extension of those of 
the judicial torture that precedes them; in the judicial 
torture, however, the game was not yet over and one could 
still save one’ s life; now one will die, without any doubt, 
and it is one’ s soul that one must save. The eternal game 
has already begun: the torture of the execution anticipates 
the punishments of the beyond; it shows what they are; it is 
the theatre of hell; the cries of the condemned man, his 
struggles, his blasphemies, already signify his irremediable 
destiny. But the pains here below may also be counted as 
penitence and so alleviate the punishments of the beyond: God 
will not fail to take such a martyrdom into account, 
providing it is borne with resignation. The cruelty of the 
earthly punishment will be deducted from the punishment to 
come: in it is glimpsed the promise of forgiveness. But, it 
might be said, are not such terrible sufferings a sign that 
God has abandoned the guilty man to the mercy of his fellow 
creatures? And, far from securing future absolution, do they 



not prefigure imminent damnation; so that, if the condemned 
man dies quickly, without a prolonged agony, is it not proof 
that God wishes to protect him and to prevent him from 
falling into despair? There is, therefore, an ambiguity in 
this suffering that may signify equally well the truth of the 
crime or the error of the judges, the goodness or the evil of 
the criminal, the coincidence or the divergence between the 
judgement of men and that of God. Hence the insatiable 
curiosity that drove the spectators to the scaffold to 
witness the spectacle of sufferings truly endured; there one 
could decipher crime and innocence, the past and the future, 
the here below and the eternal. It was a moment of truth that 
all the spectators questioned: each word, each cry, the 
duration of the agony, the resisting body, the life that 
clung desperately to it, all this constituted a sign. There 
was the man who survived ‘six hours on the wheel, and did 
not want the executioner, who consoled and heartened him no 
doubt as best he could, to leave him for a moment’ ; there 
was the man who died ‘with true Christian feeling, and who 
manifested the most sincere repentance’ ; the man who 
‘expired on the wheel an hour after being put there; it is 
said that the spectators of his torture were moved by the 
outward signs of religion and repentance that he gave’ ; the 
man who had shown the most marked signs of contrition 
throughout the journey to the scaffold, but who, when placed 
alive on the wheel, ‘did not cease to let forth the most 
horrible cries’ ; or again the woman who ‘had preserved her 
calm up to the moment when the sentence was read, but whose 
wits then began to turn; she was quite mad by the time she 
was hanged’ (Hardy, I, 13; IV, 42; V, 134). 

We have come full circle: from the judicial torture to the 
execution, the body has produced and reproduced the truth of 
the crime - or rather it constitutes the element which, 
through a whole set of rituals and trials, confesses that the 
crime took place, admits that the accused did indeed commit 
it, shows that he bore it inscribed in himself and on 
himself, supports the operation of punishment and manifests 



its effects in the most striking way. The body, several times 
tortured, provides the synthesis of the reality of the deeds 
and the truth of the investigation, of the documents of the 
case and the statements of the criminal, of the crime and the 
punishment. It is an essential element, therefore, in a penal 
liturgy, in which it must serve as the partner of a procedure 
ordered around the formidable rights of the sovereign, the 
prosecution and secrecy. 

The public execution is to be understood not only as a 
judicial, but also as a political ritual. It belongs, even in 
minor cases, to the ceremonies by which power is manifested. 

An offence, according to the law of the classical age, 
quite apart from the damage it may produce, apart even from 
the rule that it breaks, offends the rectitude of those who 
abide by the law: ‘If one commits something that the law 
forbids, even if there is neither harm nor injury to the 
individual, it is an offence that demands reparation, because 
the right of the superior man is violated and because it 
offends the dignity of his character’ (Risi, 9). Besides its 
immediate victim, the crime attacks the sovereign: it attacks 
him personally, since the law represents the will of the 
sovereign; it attacks him physically, since the force of the 
law is the force of the prince. ‘For a law to be in force in 
this kingdom, it must necessarily have emanated directly from 
the sovereign, or at least been confirmed by the seal of his 
authority’ (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). The intervention of 
the sovereign is not, therefore, an arbitration between two 
adversaries; it is much more, even, than an action to enforce 
respect for the rights of the individual; it is a direct 
reply to the person who has offended him. There can be no 
doubt that ‘the exercise of the sovereign power in the 
punishment of crime is one of the essential parts of the 
administration of justice’ (Jousse, vii). Punishment, 
therefore, cannot be identified with or even measured by the 
redress of the injury; in punishment, there must always be a 
portion that belongs to the prince, and, even when it is 



combined with the redress laid down, it constitutes the most 
important element in the penal liquidation of the crime. Now, 
this portion belonging to the prince is not in itself simple: 
on the one hand, it requires redress for the injury that has 
been done to his kingdom (as an element of disorder and as an 
example given to others, this considerable injury is out of 
all proportion to that which has been committed upon a 
private individual); but it also requires that the king take 
revenge for an affront to his very person. 

The right to punish, therefore, is an aspect of the 
sovereign’ s right to make war on his enemies: to punish 
belongs to ‘that absolute power of life and death which 
Roman law calls merum imperium, a right by virtue of which 
the prince sees that his law is respected by ordering the 
punishment of crime’ (Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). But 
punishment is also a way of exacting retribution that is both 
personal and public, since the physico-political force of the 
sovereign is in a sense present in the law: ‘One sees by the 
very definition of the law that it tends not only to 
prohibit, but also to avenge contempt for its authority by 
the punishment of those who violate its prohibitions’ 

(Muyart de Vouglans, xxxiv). In the execution of the most 
ordinary penalty, in the most punctilious respect of legal 
forms, reign the active forces of revenge. 

The public execution, then, has a juridico-political 
function. It is a ceremonial by which a momentarily injured 
sovereignty is reconstituted. It restores that sovereignty by 
manifesting it at its most spectacular. The public execution, 
however hasty and everyday, belongs to a whole series of 
great rituals in which power is eclipsed and restored 
(coronation, entry of the king into a conquered city, the 
submission of rebellious subjects); over and above the crime 
that has placed the sovereign in contempt, it deploys before 
all eyes an invincible force. Its aim is not so much to re¬ 
establish a balance as to bring into play, as its extreme 
point, the dissymmetry between the subject who has dared to 
violate the law and the all-powerful sovereign who displays 



his strength. Although redress of the private injury 
occasioned by the offence must be proportionate, although the 
sentence must be equitable, the punishment is carried out in 
such a way as to give a spectacle not of measure, but of 
imbalance and excess; in this liturgy of punishment, there 
must be an emphatic affirmation of power and of its intrinsic 
superiority. And this superiority is not simply that of 
right, but that of the physical strength of the sovereign 
beating down upon the body of his adversary and mastering it: 
by breaking the law, the offender has touched the very person 
of the prince; and it is the prince - or at least those to 
whom he has delegated his force - who seizes upon the body 
of the condemned man and displays it marked, beaten, broken. 
The ceremony of punishment, then, is an exercise of 
‘terror’ . When the jurists of the eighteenth century began 
their polemic with the reformers, they offered a restrictive, 
‘modernist’ interpretation of the physical cruelty of the 
penalties imposed by the law: if severe penalties are 
required, it is because their example must be deeply 
inscribed in the hearts of men. Yet, in fact, what had 
hitherto maintained this practice of torture was not an 
economy of example, in the sense in which it was to be 
understood at the time of the ideologues (that the 
representation of the penalty should be greater than the 
interest of the crime), but a policy of terror: to make 
everyone aware, through the body of the criminal, of the 
unrestrained presence of the sovereign. The public execution 
did not re-establish justice; it reactivated power. In the 
seventeenth century, and even in the early eighteenth 
century, it was not, therefore, with all its theatre of 
terror, a lingering hang-over from an earlier age. Its 
ruthlessness, its spectacle, its physical violence, its 
unbalanced play of forces, its meticulous ceremonial, its 
entire apparatus were inscribed in the political functioning 
of the penal system. 

This enables us to understand some of the characteristics 
of the liturgy of torture and execution - above all, the 



importance of a ritual that was to deploy its pomp in public. 
Nothing was to be hidden of this triumph of the law. Its 
episodes were traditionally the same and yet the sentences 
never failed to list them, so important were they in the 
penal mechanism: processions, halts at crossroads and church 
doors, the public reading of the sentence, kneeling, 
declarations of repentance for the offence to God and to the 
king. Sometimes questions of precedence and ceremonial were 
settled by the court itself: ‘The officers will ride 
according to the following order: namely, at the head two 
police sergeants; then the patient; after the patient, 

Bonfort and Le Corre on his left will walk together, followed 
by the clerk of the court and in this manner shall go to the 
market square at which place the judgement shall be carried 
out’ (quoted in Corre, 7). Now, this meticulous ceremonial 
was not only legal, but quite explicitly military. The 
justice of the king was shown to be an armed justice. The 
sword that punished the guilty was also the sword that 
destroyed enemies. A whole military machine surrounded the 
scaffold: cavalry of the watch, archers, guardsmen, soldiers. 
This was intended, of course, to prevent any escape or show 
of force; it was also to prevent any outburst of sympathy or 
anger on the part of the people, any attempt to save the 
condemned or to have them immediately put to death; but it 
was also a reminder that every crime constituted as it were a 
rebellion against the law and that the criminal was an enemy 
of the prince. All these reasons - whether a matter of 
precaution in particular circumstances or a functional 
element in the performance of the ritual - made the public 
execution more than an act of justice; it was a manifestation 
of force; or rather, it was justice as the physical, material 
and awesome force of the sovereign deployed there. The 
ceremony of the public torture and execution displayed for 
all to see the power relation that gave his force to the law. 

As a ritual of armed law, in which the prince showed 
himself, indissociably, both as head of justice and head of 
war, the public execution had two aspects: one of victory, 



the other of struggle. It brought to a solemn end a war, the 
outcome of which was decided in advance, between the criminal 
and the sovereign; it had to manifest the disproportion of 
power of the sovereign over those whom he had reduced to 
impotence. The dissymmetry, the irreversible imbalance of 
forces were an essential element in the public execution. A 
body effaced, reduced to dust and thrown to the winds, a body 
destroyed piece by piece by the infinite power of the 
sovereign constituted not only the ideal, but the real limit 
of punishment. Take the celebrated torture and execution of 
Massola, which took place at Avignon and which was one of the 
first to arouse the indignation of contemporaries. This was 
an apparently paradoxical ceremony, since it took place 
almost entirely after death, and since justice did little 
more than deploy its magnificent theatre, the ritual praise 
of its force, on a corpse. The condemned man was blindfolded 
and tied to a stake; all around, on the scaffold, were stakes 
with iron hooks. ‘The confessor whispered in the patient’ s 
ear and, after he had given him the blessing, the 
executioner, who had an iron bludgeon of the kind used in 
slaughter houses, delivered a blow with all his might on the 
temple of the wretch, who fell dead: the mortis exactor, who 
had a large knife, then cut his throat, which spattered him 
with blood; it was a horrible sight to see; he severed the 
sinews near the two heels, and then opened up the belly from 
which he drew the heart, liver, spleen and lungs, which he 
stuck on an iron hook, and cut and dissected into pieces, 
which he then stuck on the other hooks as he cut them, as one 
does with an animal. Look who can at such a sight’ (Bruneau, 
259). In the explicit reference to the butcher’ s trade, the 
infinitesimal destruction of the body is linked here with 
spectacle: each piece is placed on display. 

The execution was accompanied by a whole ceremonial of 
triumph; but it also included, as a dramatic nucleus in its 
monotonous progress, a scene of confrontation: this was the 
immediate, direct action of the executioner on the body of 
the ‘patient’ . It was a coded action, of course, since 



custom and, often quite explicitly, the sentence prescribed 
its principal episodes. Nevertheless, it did preserve 
something of the battle. The executioner not only implemented 
the law, he also deployed the force; he was the agent of a 
violence applied, in order to master it, to the violence of 
the crime. Materially, physically, he was the adversary of 
this crime: an adversary who could show pity or ruthlessness. 
Damhoudere complained, with many of his contemporaries, that 
the executioners exercised ‘every cruelty with regard to the 
evil-doing patients, treating them, buffeting and killing 
them as if they had a beast in their hands’ (Damhoudere, 

219). And for a long time the habit did not die out.- There 
was still an element of challenge and of jousting in the 
ceremony of public execution. If the executioner triumphed, 
if he managed to cut off the head with a single blow, he 
‘showed it to the people, put it down on the ground and then 
waved to the public who greatly applauded his skill by 
clapping’ . (A scene observed by T. S. Gueulette, at the 
execution of Montigny in 1737 - cf. Anchel, 62 - 9.) 
Conversely, if he failed, if he did not succeed in killing 
the ‘patient’ as required, he was liable to punishment. 

This was the case of Damiens’ s executioner who, being unable 
to quarter his patient according to the rules, had to cut him 
up with a knife; as a result, Damiens’ s hair, which had been 
promised to him, was confiscated and the money obtained from 
the sale given to the poor. Some years later, an executioner 
at Avignon caused excessive pain to three bandits, who were 
nevertheless formidable characters, whom he had to hang; the 
spectators became angry; they denounced him; in order to 
punish him and also to protect him from mob violence, he was 
put into prison (Duhamel, 25). And, behind this punishment of 
the unskilful executioner, stands a tradition, which is still 
close to us, according to which the condemned man should be 
pardoned if the execution happened to fail. It was a custom 
clearly established in certain countries: in Burgundy, for 
instance (cf. Chassanee, 55). The people often expected it to 
be applied, and would sometimes protect a condemned man who 


had escaped death in this way. In order to abolish both 
custom and expectation, they had to revive the adage, ‘the 
gibbet does not lose its prey’ , to introduce explicit 
instructions in capital sentences, such as ‘hanged by the 
neck until he be dead’ . And jurists like Serpillon or 
Blackstone were insisting in the middle of the eighteenth 
century that a failure on the part of the executioner did not 
mean that the condemned man’ s life was spared (Serpillon, 

III, 1100). In his Commentaries on the Laws of England, 
Blackstone remarks: ‘It is clear, that if, upon judgement to 
be hanged by the neck till he is dead, the criminal be not 
thoroughly killed, but revives, the sheriff must hang him 
again. For the former hanging was no execution of the 
sentence; and, if a false tenderness were to be indulged in 
such cases, a multitude of collusions might ensue’ 

(Blackstone, 199). There was something of the ordeal and 
something of God’ s judgement that was still indecipherable 
in the ceremony of execution. In his confrontation with the 
condemned man, the executioner was a little like the king’ s 
champion. Yet he was an unacknowledgeable and unacknowledged 
champion: the tradition was, it seems, that when the 
executioner’ s letters were sealed, they were not placed on 
the table, but thrown on the ground. The various prohibitions 
surrounding this ‘very necessary’ yet ‘unnatural’ office 
are well known (Loyseau, 80-81). The executioner may have 
been, in a sense, the king’ s sword, but he shared the infamy 
of his adversary. The sovereign power that enjoined him to 
kill, and which through him did kill, was not present in him; 
it was not identified with his own ruthlessness. And it never 
appeared with more spectacular effect than when it 
interrupted the executioner’ s gesture with a letter of 
pardon. The short time that usually elapsed between sentence 
and execution (often a few hours) meant that the pardon 
usually arrived at the very last moment. But the ceremony, by 
the very slowness of its progress, was no doubt arranged to 
leave room for this eventuality. (Cf. Hardy, 30 January 1769, 
I, 125 and 14 December 1779, IV, 229; Anchel, 162-3, tells 



the story of Antoine Boulleteix, who was already at the foot 
of the scaffold when a horseman arrived carrying the 
celebrated parchment. Shouts of ‘God save the King’ arose 
and Boulleteix was taken to the tavern, while the clerk of 
the court made a collection on his behalf.) The condemned 
always hoped for a pardon and, in order to drag things out, 
they would pretend, even at the foot of the scaffold, that 
they had further revelations to make. When the people wanted 
a pardon they called for it aloud and tried to postpone the 
last moment, looking out for the arrival of the messenger 
bearing the letter with the green wax seal and if necessary 
claiming that he was on his way (this happened during the 
execution of those condemned for the uprising against child 
abduction on 3 August 1750). The sovereign was present at the 
execution not only as the power exacting the vengeance of the 
law, but as the power that could suspend both law and 
vengeance. He alone must remain master, he alone could wash 
away the offences committed on his person; although it is 
true that he delegated to the courts the task of exercising 
his power to dispense justice, he had not transferred it; he 
retained it in its entirety and he could suspend the sentence 
or increase it at will. 

We must regard the public execution, as it was still 
ritualized in the eighteenth century, as a political 
operation. It was logically inscribed in a system of 
punishment, in which the sovereign, directly or indirectly, 
demanded, decided and carried out punishments, in so far as 
it was he who, through the law, had been injured by the 
crime. In every offence there was a crimen majestatis and in 
the least criminal a potential regicide. And the regicide, in 
turn, was neither more nor less, than the total, absolute 
criminal since, instead of attacking, like any offender, a 
particular decision or wish of the sovereign power, he 
attacked the very principle and physical person of the 
prince. The ideal punishment of the regicide had to 
constitute the summum of all possible tortures. It would be 
an expression of infinite vengeance: French law, in any case, 



made provisions for no fixed penalties for this sort of 
monstrosity. For the execution of Ravaillac the form of the 
ceremony had to be invented, by combining all the cruellest 
tortures then practised in France. For Damiens, an attempt 
was made to think up still more atrocious tortures. 
Suggestions were made, but they were considered to be less 
perfect. So the form of Ravaillac’ s execution was repeated. 
And it must be admitted that it was relatively modest if one 
thinks how in 1584 the assassin of William of Orange was 
abandoned to what seems like an infinity of vengeance. ‘On 
the first day, he was taken to the square where he found a 
cauldron of boiling water, in which was submerged the arm 
with which he had committed the crime. The next day the arm 

was cut off, and, since it fell at his feet, he was 

constantly kicking it up and down the scaffold; on the third 
day, red-hot pincers were applied to his breasts and the 
front of his arm; on the fourth day, the pincers were applied 
similarly on the back of his arm and on his buttocks; and 
thus, consecutively, this man was tortured for eighteen 
days. ’ On the last day, he was put to the wheel and 

‘maillote’ [beaten with a wooden club]. After six hours, he 

was still asking for water, which was not given him. 

‘Finally the police magistrate was begged to put an end to 
him by strangling, so that his soul should not despair and be 
lost’ (Brantome, II, 191-2). 

There can be no doubt that the existence of public tortures 
and executions were connected with something quite other than 
this internal organization. Rusche and Kirchheimer are right 
to see it as the effect of a system of production in which 
labour power, and therefore the human body, has neither the 
utility nor the commercial value that are conferred on them 
in an economy of an industrial type. Moreover, this 

‘contempt’ for the body is certainly related to a general 
attitude to death; and, in such an attitude, one can detect 
not only the values proper to Christianity, but a 
demographical, in a sense biological, situation: the ravages 



of disease and hunger, the periodic massacres of the 
epidemics, the formidable child mortality rate, the 
precariousness of the bio-economic balances - all this made 
death familiar and gave rise to rituals intended to integrate 
it, to make it acceptable and to give a meaning to its 
permanent aggression. But in analysing why the public 
executions survived for so long, one must also refer to the 
historical conjuncture; it must not be forgotten that the 
ordinance of 1670 that regulated criminal justice almost up 
to the Revolution had even increased in certain respects the 
rigour of the old edicts; Pussort, who, among the 
commissioners entrusted with the task of drawing up the 
documents, represented the intentions of the king, was 
responsible for this, despite the views of such magistrates 
as Lamoignon; the number of uprisings at the very height of 
the classical age, the rumbling close at hand of civil war, 
the king’ s desire to assert his power at the expense of the 
parlements go a long way to explain the survival of so severe 
a penal system. 

In accounting for a penal system involving so much torture, 
these are general and in a sense external reasons; they 
explain not only the possibility and the long survival of 
physical punishments, but also the weakness and the rather 
sporadic nature of the opposition to them. Against this 
general background we must bring out their precise function. 
If torture was so strongly embedded in legal practice, it was 
because it revealed truth and showed the operation of power. 
It assured the articulation of the written on the oral, the 
secret on the public, the procedure of investigation on the 
operation of the confession; it made it possible to reproduce 
the crime on the visible body of the criminal; in the same 
horror, the crime had to be manifested and annulled. It also 
made the body of the condemned man the place where the 
vengeance of the sovereign was applied, the anchoring point 
for a manifestation of power, an opportunity of affirming the 
dissymmetry of forces. We shall see later that the truth - 
power relation remains at the heart of all mechanisms of 



punishment and that it is still to be found in contemporary 
penal practice - but in a quite different form and with very 
different effects. The Enlightenment was soon to condemn 
public torture and execution as an ‘atrocity’ - a term 
that was often used to describe it, but without any critical 
intention, by jurists themselves. Perhaps the notion of 
‘atrocity’ is one of those that best designates the economy 
of the public execution in the old penal practice. To begin 
with, atrocity is a characteristic of some of the great 
crimes: it refers to the number of natural or positive, 
divine or human laws that they attack, to the scandalous 
openness or, on the contrary, to the secret cunning with 
which they have been committed, to the rank and status of 
those who are their authors and victims, to the disorder that 
they presuppose or bring with them, to the horror they 
arouse. In so far as it must bring the crime before 
everyone’ s eyes, in all its severity, the punishment must 
take responsibility for this atrocity: it must bring it to 
light by confessions, statements, inscriptions that make it 
public; it must reproduce it in ceremonies that apply it to 
the body of the guilty person in the form of humiliation and 
pain. Atrocity is that part of the crime that the punishment 
turns back as torture in order to display it in the full 
light of day: it is a figure inherent in the mechanism that 
produces the visible truth of the crime at the very heart of 
the punishment itself. The public execution formed part of 
the procedure that established the reality of what one 
punished. Furthermore, the atrocity of a crime was also the 
violence of the challenge flung at the sovereign; it was that 
which would move him to make a reply whose function was to go 
further than this atrocity, to master it, to overcome it by 
an excess that annulled it. The atrocity that haunted the 
public execution played, therefore, a double role: it was the 
principle of the communication between the crime and the 
punishment, it was also the exacerbation of the punishment in 
relation to the crime. It provided the spectacle with both 
truth and power; it was the culmination of the ritual of the 

investigation and the ceremony in which the sovereign 
triumphed. And it joined both together in the tortured body. 
The punitive practice of the nineteenth century was to strive 
to put as much distance as possible between the ‘serene’ 
search for truth and the violence that cannot be entirely 
effaced from punishment. It set out to mark the heterogeneity 
that separates the crime that is to be punished and the 
punishment imposed by the public power. Between truth and 
punishment, there should no longer be any other relation than 
one of legitimate consequence. The punishing power should not 
soil its hands with a crime greater than the one it wished to 
punish. It should remain innocent of the penalty that it 
inflicts. ‘Let us hasten to proscribe such tortures. They 
were worthy only of the crowned monsters who governed the 
Romans’ (Pastoret, on the subject of the punishment of 
regicides, II, 61). But, according to the penal practice of 
the preceding period, the proximity in the public execution 
of the sovereign and the crime, the mixture that was produced 
in it of ‘demonstration’ and punishment, were not the 
result of a barbarous confusion; what joined them together 
was the mechanism of atrocity and its necessary 
concatenations. The atrocity of the expiation organized the 
ritual destruction of infamy by omnipotence. 

The fact that the crime and the punishment were related and 
bound up in the form of atrocity was not the result of some 
obscurely accepted law of retaliation. It was the effect, in 
the rites of punishment, of a certain mechanism of power: of 
a power that not only did not hesitate to exert itself 
directly on bodies, but was exalted and strengthened by its 
visible manifestations; of a power that asserted itself as an 
armed power whose functions of maintaining order were not 
entirely unconnected with the functions of war; of a power 
that presented rules and obligations as personal bonds, a 
breach of which constituted an offence and called for 
vengeance; of a power for which disobedience was an act of 
hostility, the first sign of rebellion, which is not in 
principle different from civil war; of a power that had to 



demonstrate not why it enforced its laws, but who were its 
enemies, and what unleashing of force threatened them; of a 
power which, in the absence of continual supervision, sought 
a renewal of its effect in the spectacle of its individual 
manifestations; of a power that was recharged in the ritual 
display of its reality as ‘super-power’ . 

Of all the reasons why punishment that was not in the least 
ashamed of being ‘atrocious’ was replaced by punishment 
that was to claim the honour of being ‘humane’ there is one 
that must be analysed at once, for it is internal to the 
public execution itself: at once an element of its 
functioning and the principle of its perpetual disorder. 

In the ceremonies of the public execution, the main 
character was the people, whose real and immediate presence 
was required for the performance. An execution that was known 
to be taking place, but which did so in secret, would 
scarcely have had any meaning. The aim was to make an 
example, not only by making people aware that the slightest 
offence was likely to be punished, but by arousing feelings 
of terror by the spectacle of power letting its anger fall 
upon the guilty person: ‘In criminal matters, the most 
difficult point is the imposition of the penalty: it is the 
aim and the end of the procedure, and its only fruit, by 
example and terror, when it is well applied to the guilty 
person’ (Bruneau, unnumbered preface to the first part). 

But, in this scene of terror, the role of the people was an 
ambiguous one. People were summoned as spectators: they were 
assembled to observe public exhibitions and amendes 
honorables; pillories, gallows and scaffolds were erected in 
public squares or by the roadside; sometimes the corpses of 
the executed persons were displayed for several days near the 
scenes of their crimes. Not only must people know, they must 
see with their own eyes. Because they must be made to be 
afraid; but also because they must be the witnesses, the 
guarantors, of the punishment, and because they must to a 
certain extent take part in it. The right to be witnesses was 



one that they possessed and claimed; a hidden execution was a 
privileged execution, and in such cases it was often 
suspected that it had not taken place with all its customary 
severity. There were protests when at the last moment the 
victim was taken away out of sight. The senior postal 
official who had been put on public exhibition for killing 
his wife was later taken away from the crowd. ‘He was put 
into a hired coach; it was thought that if he had not been 
well escorted, it would have been difficult to protect him 
from being ill-treated by the populace, who yelled and jeered 
at him’ (Hardy, I, 328). When the woman Lescombat was 
hanged, care was taken to hide her face; she had ‘a kerchief 
over her neck and head, which made the public murmur and say 
that it was not Lescombat’ (Anchel, 70-71). The people 
claimed the right to observe the execution and to see who was 
being executed. The first time the guillotine was used the 
Chronique de Paris reported that people complained that they 
could not see anything and chanted, ‘Give us back our 
gallows’ (Lawrence, 71ff). The people also had a right to 
take part. The condemned man, carried in procession, 
exhibited, humiliated, with the horror of his crime recalled 
in innumerable ways, was offered to the insults, sometimes to 
the attacks of the spectators. The vengeance of the people 
was called upon to become an unobtrusive part of the 
vengeance of the sovereign. Not that it was in any way 
fundamental, or that the king had to express in his own way 
the people’ s revenge; it was rather that the people had to 
bring its assistance to the king when the king undertook ‘to 
be avenged on his enemies’ , especially when those enemies 
were to be found among the people. It was rather like a 
‘scaffold service’ that the people owed the king’ s 
vengeance. This ‘service’ had been specified in the old 
ordinances; the edict of 1347 concerning blasphemers 
stipulated that they would be exhibited at the pillory ‘from 
the hour of prime, to that of their deaths. And mud and other 
refuse, though no stone or anything injurious, could be 
thrown at their faces ••• The second time, in case of relapse, 



it is our will that he be put in the pillory on a solemn 
market day, and that his upper lip be split so that the teeth 
appear. ’ No doubt, at the classical period, this form of 
participation in the torture was no more than tolerated and 
attempts were made to limit it: because of the barbarities 
that it gave rise to and the usurpation it involved of the 
power to punish. But it belonged too closely to the general 
economy of the public execution for it to be eliminated 
altogether. Even in the eighteenth century, there were scenes 
like the one that accompanied the execution of Montigny in 
1737; as the executioner was carrying out the execution, the 
local fish-wives walked in procession, holding aloft an 
effigy of the condemned man, and then cut off its head 
(Anchel, 63). And very often, as they moved slowly in 
procession through it, criminals had to be ‘protected’ from 
the crowd - both as an example and as a target, a possible 
threat and a ‘prey’ , promised but also forbidden. In 
calling on the crowd to manifest its power, the sovereign 
tolerated for a moment acts of violence, which he accepted as 
a sign of allegiance, but which were strictly limited by the 
sovereign’ s own privileges. 

Now it was on this point that the people, drawn to the 
spectacle intended to terrorize it, could express its 
rejection of the punitive power and sometimes revolt. 
Preventing an execution that was regarded as unjust, 
snatching a condemned man from the hands of the executioner, 
obtaining his pardon by force, possibly pursuing and 
assaulting the executioners, in any case abusing the judges 
and causing an uproar against the sentence - all this formed 
part of the popular practices that invested, traversed and 
often overturned the ritual of the public execution. This 
often happened, of course, in the case of those condemned for 
rioting: there were the disturbances that followed a famous 
case of child abduction, when the crowd wanted to prevent the 
execution of three supposed rioters, who were to be hanged at 
the cemetery of Saint-Jean, ‘because there were fewer 
entrances and processions to guard’ the terrified 


executioner cut down one of the condemned men; the archers 
let fly their arrows. It occurred again after the corn riots 
of 1775; and again in 1786, when the day-labourers marched on 
Versailles and set about freeing their arrested comrades. But 
apart from these cases, when the process of agitation had 
been triggered off previously and for reasons that did not 
concern some measure of penal justice, one finds many 
examples when the agitation was provoked directly by a 
verdict and an execution: small, but innumerable 
‘disturbances around the scaffold’ . 

In their most elementary forms, these disturbances began 
with the shouts of encouragement, sometimes the cheering, 
that accompanied the condemned man to his execution. 
Throughout the long procession, he was sustained by ‘the 
compassion of the meek and tender-hearted, and with the 
applause, admiration and envy of all the bold and hardened’ 
(Fielding, 449). If the crowd gathered round the scaffold, it 
was not simply to witness the sufferings of the condemned man 
or to excite the anger of the executioner: it was also to 
hear an individual who had nothing more to lose curse the 
judges, the laws, the government and religion. The public 
execution allowed the luxury of these momentary saturnalia, 
when nothing remained to prohibit or to punish. Under the 
protection of imminent death, the criminal could say 
everything and the crowd cheered. ‘If there were annals in 
which the last words of the tortured and executed were 
scrupulously recorded, and if one had the courage to read 
through them, even if one did no more than question the vile 
populace that gathers around the scaffolds out of cruel 
curiosity, one would be told that no one who had died on the 
wheel did not accuse heaven for the misery that brought him 
to the crime, reproach his judges for their barbarity, curse 
the minister of the altars who accompanies them and blaspheme 
against the God whose organ he is’ (Boucher d’ Argis, 128 — 
9). In these executions, which ought to show only the 
terrorizing power of the prince, there was a whole aspect of 
the carnival, in which rules were inverted, authority mocked 



and criminals transformed into heroes. The shame was turned 
round; the courage, like the tears and the cries of the 
condemned, caused offence only to the law. Fielding notes 
with regret: ‘To unite the ideas of death and shame is not 
so easy as may be imagined ••• I will appeal to any man who 
hath seen an execution, or a procession to an execution; let 
him tell me. When he hath beheld a poor wretch, bound in a 
cart, just on the verge of eternity, all pale and trembling 
with his approaching fate, whether the idea of shame hath 
ever intruded on his mind? much less will the bold daring 
rogue, who glories in his present condition, inspire the 
beholder with any such sensation’ (Fielding, 450). For the 
people who are there and observe, there is always, even in 
the most extreme vengeance of the sovereign a pretext for 
revenge. 

This was especially the case if the conviction was regarded 
as unjust - or if one saw a man of the people put to death, 
for a crime that would have merited, for someone better born 
or richer, a comparatively light penalty. It would seem that 
certain practices of penal justice were no longer supported 
in the eighteenth century - and perhaps for longer - by the 
lower strata of the population. This would explain why 
executions could easily lead to the beginnings of social 
disturbances. Since the poorest - it was a magistrate who 
made the observation (Dupaty, 1786, 247) - could not be 

heard in the courts of law, it was where the law was 
manifested publicly, where they were called upon to act as 
witnesses and almost as coadjutors of this law, that they 
could intervene, physically: enter by force into the punitive 
mechanism and redistribute its effects; take up in another 
sense the violence of the punitive rituals. There was 
agitation against the difference in penalties according to 
social class: in 1781, the parish priest of Champre had been 
killed by the lord of the manor, and an attempt was made to 
declare the murderer insane; ‘the peasants, who were 
extremely attached to their pastor, were furious and had at 
first seemed ready to lay violent hands upon their lord and 



to set fire to the castle ••• Everyone protested, and rightly, 
against the indulgence of the minister who deprived justice 
of the means of punishing so abominable a crime’ (Hardy, IV, 
394). There was agitation, too, against the excessive 
sentences passed on certain common offences that were not 
regarded as serious (such as house-breaking); or against 
punishments for certain offences connected with social 
conditions such as petty larceny; the death penalty for this 
crime aroused a great deal of discontent, because there were 
many domestic servants in a single household and it was 
difficult for them, in such a case, to prove their innocence, 
and also because they could easily be victims of their 
employers’ spite and because the indulgence of certain 
masters who shut their eyes to such behaviour made the fate 
of servants accused, condemned and hanged even more 
iniquitous. The execution of such servants often gave rise to 
protests (cf. Hardy, I, 319, 367; III, 227 - 8; IV, 180). 

There was a small riot in Paris in 1761 in favour of a 
servant woman who had stolen a piece of cloth from her 
master. Despite the fact that the woman admitted her guilt, 
handed back the material and begged for mercy, the master 
refused to withdraw his complaint; on the day of the 
execution, the local people prevented the hanging, invaded 
the merchant’ s shop and looted it; in the end, the servant 
was pardoned, but a woman, who attempted, unsuccessfully, to 
stick a needle into the wicked master, was banished for three 
years (Anchel, 226). 

One remembers the great legal affairs of the eighteenth 
century, when enlightened opinion intervened in the persons 
of the philosophes and certain magistrates: Calas, Sirven and 
the Chevalier de La Barre, for instance. But less attention 
is given to the popular agitations caused by punitive 
practice. Indeed, they seldom spread beyond a town, or even a 
district. Yet they did have a real importance. Sometimes 
these movements, which originated from below, spread and 
attracted the attention of more highly placed persons who, 
taking them up, gave them a new dimension (in the years 



preceding the Revolution, the affair of Catherine Espinas, 
falsely convicted of parricide in 1785, or the case of the 
three men of Chaumont, condemned to the wheel, for whom 
Dupaty, in 1786, wrote his celebrated memoir, or that of 
Marie Franpoise Salmon, whom the parlement of Rouen in 1782 
had condemned to the stake, for poisoning, but who in 1786 
had still not been executed). More usually, those 
disturbances had maintained around penal justice and its 
manifestations, which ought to have been exemplary, a state 
of permanent unrest. How often had it proved necessary, in 
order to ensure order around the scaffolds, to take steps 
that were ‘distressing to the people’ and ‘humiliating for 
the authorities’ (Argenson, 241)? It was evident that the 
great spectacle of punishment ran the risk of being rejected 
by the very people to whom it was addressed. In fact, the 
terror of the public execution created centres of illegality: 
on execution days, work stopped, the taverns were full, the 
authorities were abused, insults or stones were thrown at the 
executioner, the guards and the soldiers; attempts were made 
to seize the condemned man, either to save him or to kill him 
more surely; fights broke out, and there was no better prey 
for thieves than the curious throng around the scaffold. 

(Hardy recounts a number of cases like the important theft 
that was committed in the very house in which the police 
magistrate was lodging - IV, 56. ) But above all - and this 
was why these disadvantages became a political danger - the 
people never felt closer to those who paid the penalty than 
in those rituals intended to show the horror of the crime and 
the invincibility of power; never did the people feel more 
threatened, like them, by a legal violence exercised without 
moderation or restraint. The solidarity of a whole section of 
the population with those we would call petty offenders - 
vagrants, false beggars, the indigent poor, pickpockets, 
receivers and dealers in stolen goods - was constantly 
expressed: resistance to police searches, the pursuit of 
informers, attacks on the watch or inspectors provide 
abundant evidence of this (cf. Richet, 118-19). And it was 



the breaking up of this solidarity that was becoming the aim 
of penal and police repression. Yet out of the ceremony of 
the public execution, out of that uncertain festival in which 
violence was instantaneously reversible, it was this 
solidarity much more than the sovereign power that was likely 
to emerge with redoubled strength. The reformers of the 
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries were not to forget that, 
in the last resort, the executions did not, in fact, frighten 
the people. One of their first cries was to demand their 
abolition. 

To clarify the political problem posed by the intervention 
of the people in the spectacle of the executions, one need 
only cite two events. The first took place at Avignon at the 
end of the seventeenth century. It contained all the 
principal elements of the theatre of horror: the physical 
confrontation between the executioner and the condemned man, 
the reversal of the duel, the executioner pursued by the 
people, the condemned man saved by the ensuing riot and the 
violent inversion of the penal machinery. A murderer by the 
name of Pierre du Fort was to be hanged; several times he 
‘had caught his feet in the steps’ and had not been able to 
swing freely. ‘Seeing this, the executioner had pulled his 
jerkin up over his face and struck him below the knees, on 
the stomach and on the belly. When the people saw that the 
executioner was causing him too much pain, and even believing 
that he was killing him down there with a bayonet ••• moved by 
compassion for the patient and fury at the executioner, they 
threw stones at the scaffold just as the executioner knocked 
away the two ladders and threw the patient down and leaped on 
to his shoulders and kicked him, while the wife of the said 
executioner pulled at his feet from under the gallows. In 
doing so, they made blood come from his mouth. But the hail 
of stones came thicker - one stone even struck the hanged 
man on the head - which forced the executioner to dash to 
the ladder, which he descended so rapidly that half-way down 
he fell from it, and struck his head on the ground. Then a 
crowd of people fell upon him. He got to his feet, bayonet in 



hand, threatening to kill anyone who came near him; after 
falling several times, he finally got to his feet, only to be 
beaten by the crowd, rolled in the mud and nearly drowned in 
the stream, then dragged by the excited and enraged crowd to 
the University and to the Cordeliers Cemetery. His servant 
was also beaten and, with bruises on his head and body, was 
taken to the hospital where he died some days later. However, 
some strangers and unknown people mounted the ladder and cut 
the rope while others caught the hanged man from below after 
he had been hanging there longer than it took to say a full 
Miserere. The crowd then smashed the gallows and broke the 
executioner’ s ladder into pieces ••• Children carried off the 
gallows and threw it into the Rhone. ’ The condemned man was 
then taken to a cemetery ‘so that he should not be 
recaptured by the law and from there to the church of Sainte- 
Antoine’ . The archbishop gave him his pardon, had him taken 
to the hospital and asked that particular care be taken of 
him. Lastly, adds the writer of the account, ‘we had a new 
suit, two pairs of stockings and shoes made for him. We 
dressed him in new clothes from head to toe. Our colleagues 
gave him shirts, breeches and a wig’ (Duhamel, 5-6; scenes 
of this kind were still taking place in the nineteenth 
century - cf. Lawrence, 56 and 195-8). 

The other event took place in Paris, a century later. It 
was in 1775, shortly after the corn riot. Because of the 
state of extreme tension among the people, the authorities 
wanted the execution to take place without interruption. 
Between the scaffold and the public, kept at a safe distance, 
two ranks of soldiers stood on guard, one facing the 
execution that was about to take place, the other facing the 
people in case of riot. Contact was broken: it was a public 
execution, but one in which the element of spectacle was 
neutralized, or rather reduced to abstract intimidation. 
Protected by force of arms, on an empty square, justice 
quietly did its work. If it showed the death that it had 
dealt, it was from high and far: ‘The two gallows, which 
were eighteen feet high, no doubt by way of an example, were 



not set up until three o’ clock in the afternoon. From two 
o’ clock, the Place de Greve and all the surrounding streets 
had been filled with detachments of different troops, some on 
foot, some on horse; the Swiss and the French guards 
continued to patrol the adjacent streets. No one was allowed 
on to the Greve during the execution, and all around one 
could see a double row of soldiers, bayonets at the ready, 
standing back to back, so that some looked outwards and some 
into the square; the two wretches ••• cried out all the way 
that they were innocent and continued to protest in like 
manner as they mounted the ladder’ (Hardy, III, 67). 

Whatever the part played by feelings of humanity for the 
condemned in the abandonment of the liturgy of the public 
executions, there was, in any case, on the part of the state 
power, a political fear of the effects of these ambiguous 
rituals. 

Such an equivocal attitude appeared clearly in what might 
be called the ‘gallows speeches’ . The rite of execution was 
so arranged that the condemned man would himself proclaim his 
guilt by the amende honorable that he spoke, by the placard 
that he displayed and also by the statements that he was no 
doubt forced to make. Furthermore, at the moment of the 
execution, it seems that he was given another opportunity to 
speak, not to proclaim his innocence, but to acknowledge his 
crime and the justice of his conviction. The chronicles 
relate a good many speeches of this kind. Were they actually 
delivered? In a number of cases, certainly. Or were they 
fictional speeches that were later circulated by way of 
example and exhortation? This, no doubt, was more often the 
case. What credit are we to accord, for example, to the 
account of the death of Marion Le Goff, who had been a famous 
bandit leader in Brittany in the mid-eighteenth century? She 
is supposed to have cried out from the scaffold: ‘Fathers 
and mothers who hear me now, watch over your children and 
teach them well; in my childhood I was a liar and good-for- 
nothing; I began by stealing a small six-liard knife ••• Then 



I robbed pedlars and cattle dealers; finally, I led a robber 
band and that is why I am here. Tell all this to your 
children and let it be an example to them’ (Corre, 257). 

Such a speech is too close, even in its turn of phrase, to 
the morality traditionally to be found in the broadsheets and 
pamphlets for it not to be apocryphal. But the existence of 
the ‘last words of a condemned man’ genre is in itself 
significant. The law required that its victim should 
authenticate in some sense the tortures that he had 
undergone. The criminal was asked to consecrate his own 
punishment by proclaiming the blackness of his crimes; he was 
made to say, as was Jean-Dominique Langlade, three times a 
murderer: ‘Listen to my horrible, infamous and lamentable 

deed, committed in the city of Avignon, where the memory of 
me is execrable, for having inhumanly violated the sacred 
rites of friendship’ (Duhamel, 32). In one sense, the 
broadsheet and the death song were the sequel to the trial; 
or rather they pursued that mechanism by which the public 
execution transferred the secret, written truth of the 
procedure to the body, gesture and speech of the criminal. 
Justice required these apocrypha in order to be grounded in 
truth. Its decisions were thus surrounded by all these 
posthumous ‘proofs’ . Sometimes, too, accounts of crimes and 
infamous lives were published, simply as propaganda, before 
any trial had taken place, in order to force the hand of a 
court that was suspected of being too tolerant. In order to 
discredit smugglers, the Compagnie des Fermes published 
‘bulletins’ recounting their crimes: in 1768, it 
distributed broadsheets against a certain Montagne, the 
leader of a gang, of whom the writer himself says: ‘Some 
thefts have been ascribed to him the truth of which is 
somewhat uncertain •••; Montagne has been depicted as a wild 
beast, a second hyena to be hunted down; given the hotheads 
of the Auvergne, this idea has caught on’ (cf. Juillard, 

24). 

But the effect, like the use, of this literature was 
equivocal. The condemned man found himself transformed into a 



hero by the sheer extent of his widely advertised crimes, and 
sometimes the affirmation of his belated repentance. Against 
the law, against the rich, the powerful, the magistrates, the 
constabulary or the watch, against taxes and their 
collectors, he appeared to have waged a struggle with which 
one all too easily identified. The proclamation of these 
crimes blew up to epic proportions the tiny struggle that 
passed unperceived in everyday life. If the condemned man was 
shown to be repentant, accepting the verdict, asking both God 
and man for forgiveness for his crimes, it was as if he had 
come through some process of purification: he died, in his 
own way, like a saint. But indomitability was an alternative 
claim to greatness: by not giving in under torture, he gave 
proof of a strength that no power had succeeded in bending: 

‘On the day of the execution - this will seem scarcely 
credible - I showed no trace of emotion, as I performed my 
amende honorable, and when I finally lay down on the cross I 
showed no fear’ (the Complainte of J. -D. Langlade, executed 
at Avignon 12 April 1768). Black hero or reconciled criminal, 
defender of the true right or an indomitable force, the 
criminal of the broadsheets, pamphlets, almanacs and 
adventure stories brought with him, beneath the apparent 
morality of the example not to be followed, a whole memory of 
struggles and confrontations. A convicted criminal could 
become after his death a sort of saint, his memory honoured 
and his grave respected. (This was the case of Tanguy, 
executed in Brittany about 1740. Before being convicted, it 
is true, he had begun a long penitence ordered by his 
confessor. Was this a conflict between civil justice and 
religious penitence? Cf. Corre, 21.) The criminal has been 
almost entirely transformed into a positive hero. There were 
those for whom glory and abomination were not dissociated, 
but coexisted in a reversible figure. Perhaps we should see 
this literature of crime, which proliferated around a few 
exemplary figures,- neither as a spontaneous form of 
‘popular expression’ , nor as a concerted programme of 
propaganda and moralization from above; it was a locus in 


which two investments of penal practice met - a sort of 
battleground around the crime, its punishment and its memory. 
If these accounts were allowed to be printed and circulated, 
it was because they were expected to have the effect of an 
ideological control - the printing and the distribution of 
these almanacs, broadsheets, etc. was in principle subject to 
strict control. But if these true stories of everyday history 
were received so avidly, if they formed part of the basic 
reading of the lower classes, it was because people found in 
them not only memories, but also precedents; the interest of 
‘curiosity’ is also a political interest. Thus these texts 
may be read as two-sided discourses, in the facts that they 
relate, in the effects they give to these facts and in the 
glory they confer on those ‘illustrious’ criminals, and no 
doubt in the very words they use (one should study the use of 
such categories as ‘misfortune’ or ‘abomination’ or such 
epithets as ‘famous’ or ‘lamentable’ in accounts such as 
The History of the Life, Great Robberies and Tricks of 
GuilTeri and his Companions and of their Lamentable and 
Unhappy End. - 

Perhaps we should compare this literature with the 
‘disturbances around the scaffold’ in which, through the 
tortured body of the criminal, the power that condemned 
confronted the people that was the witness, the participant, 
the possible and indirect victim of this execution. In the 
wake of a ceremony that inadequately channelled the power 
relations it sought to ritualize, a whole mass of discourses 
appeared pursuing the same confrontation; the posthumous 
proclamation of the crimes justified justice, but also 
glorified the criminal. That was why the reformers of the 
penal system were soon demanding suppression of these 
broadsheets.- That was why the people showed so lively an 
interest in what served more or less as the minor, everyday 
epic of illegalities. That was why the broadsheets lost their 
importance as the political function of popular illegality 
altered. 


And they disappeared as a whole new literature of crime 
developed: a literature in which crime is glorified, because 
it is one of the fine arts, because it can be the work only 
of exceptional natures, because it reveals the monstrousness 
of the strong and powerful, because villainy is yet another 
mode of privilege: from the adventure story to de Quincey, or 
from the Castle of Otranto to Baudelaire, there is a whole 
aesthetic rewriting of crime, which is also the appropriation 
of criminality in acceptable forms. In appearance, it is the 
discovery of the beauty and greatness of crime; in fact, it 
is the affirmation that greatness too has a right to crime 
and that it even becomes the exclusive privilege of those who 
are really great. The great murders are not for the pedlars 
of petty crime. While, from Gaboriau onwards, the literature 
of crime follows this first shift: by his cunning, his 
tricks, his sharp-wittedness, the criminal represented in 
this literature has made himself impervious to suspicion; and 
the struggle between two pure minds - the murderer and the 
detective - will constitute the essential form of the 
confrontation. We are far removed indeed from those accounts 
of the life and misdeeds of the criminal in which he admitted 
his crimes, and which recounted in detail the tortures of his 
execution: we have moved from the exposition of the facts or 
the confession to the slow process of discovery; from the 
execution to the investigation; from the physical 
confrontation to the intellectual struggle between criminal 
and investigator. It was not only the broadsheets that 
disappeared with the birth of a literature of crime; the 
glory of the rustic malefactor and his sombre transformation 
into a hero by the process of torture and execution went with 
them. The man of the people was now too simple to be the 
protagonist of subtle truths. In this new genre, there were 
no more popular heroes or great executions; the criminal was 
wicked, of course, but he was also intelligent; and although 
he was punished, he did not have to suffer. The literature of 
crime transposes to another social class the spectacle that 
had surrounded the criminal. Meanwhile the newspapers took 



over the task of recounting the grey, unheroic details of 
everyday crime and punishment. The split was complete; the 
people was robbed of its old pride in its crimes; the great 
murders had become the quiet game of the well behaved. 




Part Two 


PUNISHMENT 



1. Generalized punishment 


‘Let penalties be regulated and proportioned to the 
offences, let the death sentence be passed only on those 
convicted of murder, and let the tortures that revolt 
humanity be abolished. ’ Thus, in 1789, the chancellery 
summed up the general position of the petitions addressed to 
the authorities concerning tortures and executions (cf. 
Seligman, and Desjardin, 13-20). Protests against the public 
executions proliferated in the second half of the eighteenth 
century: among the philosophers and theoreticians of the law; 
among lawyers and parlementaires\ in popular petitions and 
among the legislators of the assemblies. Another form of 
punishment was needed: the physical confrontation between the 
sovereign and the condemned man must end; this hand-to-hand 
fight between the vengeance of the prince and the contained 
anger of the people, through the mediation of the victim and 
the executioner, must be concluded. Very soon the public 
execution became intolerable. On the side of power, where it 
betrayed tyranny, excess, the thirst for revenge, and ‘the 
cruel pleasure taken in punishing’ (Petion de Villeneuve, 
641), it was revolting. On the side of the victim who, though 
reduced to despair, was still expected to bless ‘heaven and 
its judges who appeared to have abandoned him’ (Boucher 
d’ Argis, 1781, 125), it was shameful. It was, in any case, 
dangerous, in that it provided a support for a confrontation 
between the violence of the king and the violence of the 
people. It was as if the sovereign power did not see, in this 
emulation of atrocity, a challenge that it itself threw down 
and which might one day be taken up: accustomed as it was to 



‘seeing blood flow’ , the people soon learnt that ‘it could 
be revenged only with blood’ (Lachere). In these ceremonies, 
which were the object of so much adverse investment, one sees 
the intersection of the excess of armed justice and the anger 
of the threatened people. Joseph de Maistre was to recognize 
in this relation one of the fundamental mechanisms of 
absolute power: the executioner acts as a cog between the 
prince and the people; the death he deals is like that of the 
serfs who built St Petersburg over swamp and pestilence: it 
is a principle of universality; of the individual will of the 
despot, it makes a law for all, and of each of those 
destroyed bodies, a stone for the State; it hardly matters 
that innocents, too, are struck down! In this same dangerous 
and ritual violence, the eighteenth-century reformers 
denounced, on the contrary, that which exceeded, on both 
sides, the legitimate exercise of power: in this violence, 
according to them, tyranny confronts rebellion; each calls 
forth the other. It is a double danger. Instead of taking 
revenge, criminal justice should simply punish. 

This need for punishment without torture was first 
formulated as a cry from the heart or from an outraged 
nature. In the worst of murderers, there is one thing, at 
least, to be respected when one punishes: his ‘humanity’ . 
The day was to come, in the nineteenth century, when this 
‘man’ , discovered in the criminal, would become the target 
of penal intervention, the object that it claimed to correct 
and transform, the domain of a whole series of 
‘criminological’ sciences and strange ‘penitentiary’ 
practices. But, at the time of the Enlightenment, it was not 
as a theme of positive knowledge that man was opposed to the 
barbarity of the public executions, but as a legal limit: the 
legitimate frontier of the power to punish. Not that which 
must be reached in order to alter him, but that which must be 
left intact in order to respect him. Noli me tangere. It 
marks the end of the sovereign’ s vengeance. The ‘man’ that 
the reformers set up against the despotism of the scaffold 



has also become a ‘man-measure’ : not of things, but of 
power. 

There is, therefore, a problem here: how was this man- 
measure opposed to the traditional practice of punishment? 

How did he become the great moral justification of the reform 
movement? Why this universal horror of torture and such 
lyrical insistence that punishment be ‘humane’ ? Or, which 
amounts to the same thing, how are the two elements, which 
are everywhere present in demands for a more lenient penal 
system, ‘measure’ and ‘humanity’ , to be articulated upon 
one another, in a single strategy? These elements are so 
necessary and yet so uncertain that it is they, as disturbing 
as ever and still associated in the same dubious relation, 
that one finds today whenever the problem of an economy of 
punishment is posed. It is as if the eighteenth century had 
opened up the crisis of this economy and, in order to resolve 
it, proposed the fundamental law that punishment must have 
‘humanity’ as its ‘measure’ , without any definitive 
meaning being given to this principle, which nevertheless is 
regarded as insuperable. We must, therefore, recount the 
birth and early days of this enigmatic ‘leniency’ . 

Homage is paid to the ‘great reformers’ - Beccaria, 
Servan, Dupaty, Lacretelle, Duport, Pastoret, Target, 

Bergasse, the compilers of the Cahiers, or petitions, and the 
Constituent Assembly - for having imposed this leniency on a 
legal machinery and on ‘classical’ theoreticians who, at 
the end of the eighteenth century, were still rejecting it 
with well-formulated arguments. (Cf. , in particular, Muyart 
de Vouglans’ s polemic against Beccaria - Muyart, 1766.) 

Yet this reform, must be situated in a process that 
historians have recently uncovered through the study of legal 
archives: the relaxation of penality in the eighteenth 
century or, to be more precise, the double movement by which, 
during this period, crimes seemed to lose their violence, 
while punishments, reciprocally, lost some of their 
intensity, but at the cost of greater intervention. From the 



end of the seventeenth century, in fact, one observes a 
considerable diminution in murders and, generally speaking, 
in physical acts of aggression; offences against property 
seem to take over from crimes of violence; theft and 
swindling, from murder and assault; the diffuse, occasional, 
but frequent delinquency of the poorest classes was 
superseded by a limited, but ‘skilled’ delinquency; the 
criminals of the seventeenth century were ‘harassed men, 
ill-fed, quick to act, quick to anger, seasonal criminals’ ; 
those of the eighteenth, ‘crafty, cunning, sly, 
calculating’ criminals on the fringes of society (Chaunu, 
1962, 236 and 1966, 107 - 8). Lastly, the internal 
organizations of delinquency altered; the great gangs of 
malefactors (looters working in small, armed units, groups of 
smugglers firing on the agents of the tax authorities, 
disbanded soldiers or deserters who roamed the countryside 
together) tended to break up; tracked down more efficiently 
and forced to work in smaller groups - often no more than 
half-a-dozen men - in order to pass undetected, they 
contented themselves with more furtive operations, with a 
more modest deployment of forces and less risk of bloodshed: 

‘The physical destruction or institutional dislocation of 
large gangs ••• left the field free for an anti-property form 
of delinquency practised by individuals or very small groups 
of robbers and pickpockets, seldom more than four in number’ 
(Le Roy-Ladurie). A general movement shifted criminality from 
the attack of bodies to the more or less direct seizure of 
goods; and from a ‘mass criminality’ to a ‘marginal 
criminality’ , partly the preserve of professionals. It was 
as if there had been a gradual lowering of level - ‘a 
defusion of the tensions that dominate human relations, ••• a 
better control of violent impulses’ - - and as if the 

illegal practices had themselves slackened their hold on the 
body and turned to other targets. Crime became less violent 
long before punishment became less severe. But this 
transformation cannot be separated from several underlying 
processes. The first of these, as P. Chaunu observes, was a 


change in the operation of economic pressures, a general rise 
in the standard of living, a large demographic expansion, an 
increase in wealth and property and ‘a consequent need for 
security’ (Chaunu, 1971, 56). Furthermore, throughout the 
eighteenth century, one can observe a certain increased 
severity in the law: in England, out of the 223 capital 
crimes in force at the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
156 had been introduced during the preceding hundred years 
(Buxton, XXXIX); in France, the legislation on vagabondage 
had been revised in the direction of greater severity on 
several occasions since the seventeenth century; a tighter, 
more meticulous implementation of the law tended to take 
account of a mass of minor offences that it once allowed to 
escape more easily: ‘in the eighteenth century, the law 
became slower, heavier, harder on theft, whose relative 
frequency had increased, and towards which it now assumed the 
bourgeois appearances of a class justice’ the growth in 
France above all, and especially in Paris, of a police 
apparatus that prevented the development of organized, open 
criminality, shifted it towards more discreet forms; to this 
set of precautions, one should add the very widespread belief 
in a constant and dangerous rise in crime. Whereas the 
historians of today observe a diminution in the great gangs 
of malefactors, Le Trosne saw them roaming the French 
countryside like swarms of locusts: ‘It is these voracious 
insects who daily lay waste the subsistence of the 
cultivators. They are, quite literally, enemy troops 
spreading over the surface of the territory, living as they 
wish, as in a conquered country, exacting levies under the 
name of alms. ’ They cost the poorest peasants more than 
taxes: the richer peasants had to pay anything up to a third 
of their incomes (Le Trosne, 1764, 4). Most observers 
maintained that crime was increasing - they included, of 
course, those who advocated sterner measures; they also 
included those who thought that a law that was more 
restrained in its use of violence would be more effective, 
less liable to retreat before its own consequences (cf. , for 


example, Dupaty, 247); and they included the magistrates who 
claimed to be swamped by the number of trials: ‘the misery 
of the people and the corruption of morals have increased the 
number of crimes and convicted criminals’ (one of the judges 
of the Chambre de la Tournelle in an address to the king, 2 
August 1768, quoted in Farge, 66); in any case, that crime 
was on the increase was shown by the real practice of the 
courts. ‘The revolutionary and imperial era could already be 
sensed in the last years of the Ancien Regime. One is struck, 
in the trials of 1782 - 9, by the increase in tension. There 
is a new severity towards the poor, a concerted rejection of 
evidence, a rise in mutual mistrust, hatred and fear’ 

(Chaunu, 1966, 108). 

In fact, the shift from a criminality of blood to a 
criminality of fraud forms part of a whole complex mechanism, 
embracing the development of production, the increase of 
wealth, a higher juridical and moral value placed on property 
relations, stricter methods of surveillance, a tighter 
partitioning of the population, more efficient techniques of 
locating and obtaining information: the shift in illegal 
practices is correlative with an extension and a refinement 
of punitive practices. 

Was this a general change of attitude, a ‘change that 
belongs to the domain of the spirit and the subconscious’ 

(the expression is Mogensen’ s)? Perhaps, but more certainly 
and more immediately it was an effort to adjust the 
mechanisms of power that frame the everyday lives of 
individuals; an adaptation and a refinement of the machinery 
that assumes responsibility for and places under surveillance 
their everyday behaviour, their identity, their activity, 
their apparently unimportant gestures; another policy for 
that multiplicity of bodies and forces that constitutes a 
population. What was emerging no doubt was not so much a new 
respect for the humanity of the condemned - torture was 
still frequent in the execution of even minor criminals - as 
a tendency towards a more finely tuned justice, towards a 
closer penal mapping of the social body. Following a circular 



process, the threshold of the passage to violent crimes 
rises, intolerance to economic offences increases, controls 
become more thorough, penal interventions at once more 
premature and more numerous. 

If one compares this process with the critical discourse of 
the reformers, a remarkable strategic coincidence emerges. 
What they were attacking in traditional justice, before they 
set out the principles of a new penality, was certainly the 
excessive nature of the punishments; but an excess that was 
bound up with an irregularity even more than with an abuse of 
the power to punish. On 24 March 1790, Thouret opened the 
debate in the Constituent Assembly on the new organization of 
the judicial power. In his view, this power had become 
‘denatured’ in France in three ways. By private 
appropriation: the offices of judge were sold; they were 
hereditary; they had a commercial value and, for that reason, 
the justice that was handed out was onerous. By a confusion 
between two types of power: that which dispenses justice and 
formulates a sentence by applying the law and that which 
creates the law itself. Lastly, by the existence of a whole 
series of privileges that made the implementation of the law 
inconsistent: there were courts, procedures, litigants, even 
offences that were ‘privileged’ and fell outside common law 
(.Archives parlementaires, XII, 344). This was only one of the 
many criticisms that had been levied at the legal system for 
the past fifty years at least, all of which denounced in this 
denaturation the principle of an irregular justice. Penal 
justice was irregular first of all by virtue of the 
multiplicity of courts responsible for assuring it, without 
ever forming a single and continuous pyramid (cf. Linguet or 
Boucher d’ Argis, 1789). Quite apart from the ecclesiastical 
jurisdictions, we must take into account the discontinuities, 
overlappings and conflicts between the different legal 
systems: those of the nobility, which still played an 
important role in judging petty offences; those of the king, 
which were themselves numerous and badly coordinated (the 
sovereign courts were often in conflict with the bailiffs’ 



courts and above all with the presidial courts, which had 
recently been created as intermediary instances); those 
which, de jure or de facto, were administered by governmental 
authorities (such as the intendants, or provincial 
administrators) or police authorities (such as the provosts 
and police magistrates); to these should also be added the 
right possessed by the king or his representatives to take 
decisions on internment or exile quite outside any regular 
procedure. By their very plethora these innumerable 
authorities cancelled each other out and were incapable of 
covering the social body in its entirety. Paradoxically, 
their overlapping left penal justice with innumerable 
loopholes. This incompleteness was a result of differences of 
custom and procedure, despite the Ordonnance Generate of 
1670; of internal conflicts of responsibility; of private 
interests - political or economic - which each authority 
found itself defending; and, lastly, of the interventions of 
the royal power, which could prevent, by means of pardons, 
commuted sentences, the evocation of a case before the royal 
council or direct pressure exerted on magistrates, the 
regular, austere course of justice. 

The criticism of the reformers was directed not so much at 
the weakness or cruelty of those in authority, as at a bad 
economy of power. There was too much power in the lower 
jurisdictions, which could - aided by the ignorance and 
poverty of those convicted - ignore appeal procedure and 
carry out arbitrary sentences without adequate supervision; 
there was too much power on the side of the prosecution, 
which possessed almost unlimited means of pursuing its 
investigations, while the accused opposed it virtually 
unarmed - this led judges to be sometimes over-severe and 
sometimes, by way of reaction, too lenient; there was too 
much power in the hands of the judges who were able to 
content themselves with futile evidence, providing it was 
‘legal’ evidence, and who were allowed too great a freedom 
in the choice of penalty; there was too much power in the 
hands of the ‘gens du roi’ , or royal magistrates, in 



relation to the accused, but also in relation to other 
magistrates; lastly, there was too much power exercised by 
the king, who could suspend courts of justice, alter their 
decisions, remove magistrates from office, or exile them, and 
replace them by judges acting under royal commission. The 
paralysis of justice was due not so much to a weakening as to 
a badly regulated distribution of power, to its concentration 
at a certain number of points and to the conflicts and 
discontinuities that resulted. 

This dysfunction of power was related to a central excess: 
what might be called the monarchical ‘super-power 7 , which 
identified the right to punish with the personal power of the 
sovereign. This theoretical identification made the king the 
fons justitiae ; but the practical consequences of this were 
to be found even in that which appeared to oppose him and to 
limit his absolutism. It was because the king, in order to 
raise money, had appropriated the right to sell legal 
offices, which ‘belonged’ to him, that he was confronted by 
magistrates who owned their offices and who were not only 
intractable, but ignorant, self-interested and frequently 
compromised. It was because he was constantly creating new 
offices that he multiplied the conflicts of power and 
authority. It was because he exercised too close a power over 
his ‘gens’ and conferred on them almost discretionary 
powers that he intensified the conflicts within the 
magistrature. It was because he had brought the law into 
conflict with too many summary acts of justice (the 
jurisdictions of the provosts or police magistrates) or with 
administrative measures, that he paralysed normal justice, 
rendered it sometimes lenient and inconsistent, but sometimes 
over-hasty and severe. - 

It was not so much, or not only, the privileges of justice, 
its arbitrariness, its archaic arrogance, its uncontrolled 
rights that were criticized; but rather the mixture of its 
weaknesses and excesses, its exaggerations and its loopholes, 
and above all the very principle of this mixture, the 
‘super-power’ of the monarch. The true objective of the 


reform movement, even in its most general formulations, was 
not so much to establish a new right to punish based on more 
equitable principles, as to set up a new ‘economy’ of the 
power to punish, to assure its better distribution, so that 
it should be neither too concentrated at certain privileged 
points, nor too divided between opposing authorities; so that 
it should be distributed in homogeneous circuits capable of 
operating everywhere, in a continuous way, down to the finest 
grain of the social body. - The reform of criminal law must 
be read as a strategy for the rearrangement of the power to 
punish, according to modalities that render it more regular, 
more effective, more constant and more detailed in its 
effects; in short, which increase its effects while 
diminishing its economic cost (that is to say, by 
dissociating it from the system of property, of buying and 
selling, of corruption in obtaining not only offices, but the 
decisions themselves) and its political cost (by dissociating 
it from the arbitrariness of monarchical power). The new 
juridical theory of penality corresponds in fact to a new 
‘political economy’ of the power to punish. This explains 
why the ‘reform’ did not have a single origin. It was not 
the more enlightened members of the public, nor the 
philosophes, who regarded themselves as enemies of despotism 
and friends of mankind; it was not even the social groups 
opposed to the parlementaires who instigated the reform. Or 
rather it was not they alone; in this same overall project of 
a new distribution of the power to punish, and of a new 
distribution of its effects, many different interests came 
together. The reform was not prepared outside the legal 
machinery and against all its representatives; it was 
prepared, for the most part, from within, by a large number 
of magistrates and on the basis of shared objectives and the 
power conflicts that divided them. Certainly the reformers 
did not form a majority of the magistrates; but it was a body 
of lawyers who outlined its general principles: a power to 
judge that would not be affected by the immediate exercise of 
the prince’ s sovereignty; that would be relieved of any 


claim to legislate; that would be detached from property 
relations; and which, having no other functions but to judge, 
would exercise that power to the full. In short, the power to 
judge should no longer depend on the innumerable, 
discontinuous, sometimes contradictory privileges of 
sovereignty, but on the continuously distributed effects of 
public power. This general principle defined an overall 
strategy that covered many different struggles. Those of 
philosophers like Voltaire and of publicists like Brissot or 
Marat; but also those of magistrates whose interests were 
nevertheless very diverse: Le Trosne, a judge at the 
presidial court of Orleans, and Lacretelle, the advocate- 
general at the parlement; Target, who with the parlements was 
opposed to Maupeou’ s reform; but also J. N. Moreau, who 
supported the royal power against the pariementaires', Servan 
and Dupaty, both magistrates, but in conflict with their 
colleagues, etc. 

Throughout the eighteenth century, inside and outside the 
legal apparatus, in both everyday penal practice and the 
criticism of institutions, one sees the emergence of a new 
strategy for the exercise of the power to punish. And 
‘reform’ , in the strict sense, as it was formulated in the 
theories of law or as it was outlined in the various 
projects, was the political or philosophical resumption of 
this strategy, with its primary objectives: to make of the 
punishment and repression of illegalities a regular function, 
coextensive with society; not to punish less, but to punish 
better; to punish with an attenuated severity perhaps, but in 
order to punish with more universality and necessity; to 
insert the power to punish more deeply into the social body. 

The conjuncture that saw the birth of reform is not, 
therefore, that of a new sensibility, but that of another 
policy with regard to illegalities. 

Roughly speaking, one might say that, under the Ancien 
Regime each of the different social strata had its margin of 
tolerated illegality: the non-application of the rule, the 
non-observance of the innumerable edicts or ordinances were a 
condition of the political and economic functioning of 
society. This feature may not have been peculiar to the 
Ancien Regime. But illegality was so deeply rooted and so 
necessary to the life of each social stratum, that it had in 
a sense its own coherence and economy. Sometimes it took on 
an absolutely statutory form - as with the privileges 
accorded certain individuals and groups - which made it not 
so much an illegality as a regular exemption. Sometimes it 
took the form of a massive general non-observance, which 
meant that for decades, sometimes for centuries, ordinances 
could be published and constantly renewed without ever being 
implemented. Sometimes it was a matter of laws gradually 
falling into abeyance, then suddenly being reactivated; 
sometimes of silent consent on the part of the authorities, 
neglect, or quite simply the actual impossibility of imposing 
the law and apprehending offenders. The least-favoured strata 
of the population did not have, in principle, any privileges: 
but they benefited, within the margins of what was imposed on 
them by law and custom, from a space of tolerance, gained by 
force or obstinacy; and this space was for them so 
indispensable a condition of existence that they were often 
ready to rise up to defend it; the attempts that were made 
periodically to reduce it, by reviving old laws or by 
improving the methods of apprehending, provoked popular 
disturbances, just as attempts to reduce certain privileges 
disturbed the nobility, the clergy and the bourgeoisie. 

This necessary illegality, of which every social stratum 
bore within itself specific forms, was caught up in a series 
of paradoxes. In its lower regions, it was identified with 
criminality, from which it was difficult to distinguish it 
juridically, if not morally: from fiscal illegality to 
customs illegality, to smuggling, to looting, to the armed 
struggle against the government’ s taxation agents, then 
against the soldiers themselves and, finally, to rebellion, 
there was a continuity, in which it was difficult to mark the 
frontiers; or, again, vagabondage (severely punished 



according to the terms of ordinances that were never 
implemented) with the pillage, aggravated theft, even murder 
that went with it, provided a welcome environment to the 
unemployed, to workers who had left their employers in 
irregular circumstances, to domestic servants who had some 
reason to flee their masters, to ill-treated apprentices, to 
deserting soldiers, to all those who wished to escape the 
press-gang. So criminality merged into a wider illegality, to 
which the lower strata were attached as to conditions of 
existence; and, conversely, this illegality was a perpetual 
factor in the increase of crime. Hence an ambiguity in 
popular attitudes: on the one hand, the criminal - 
especially when he happened to be a smuggler or a peasant who 
had fled from the exactions of a master - benefited from a 
spontaneous wave of sympathy: his acts of violence were seen 
as descending directly from old struggles. On the other hand, 
a man who, under cover of an illegality accepted by the 
population, committed crimes at the expense of this 
population, the vagrant beggar, for example, who robbed and 
murdered, easily became the object of a special hate: he had 
redirected upon the least favoured illegality that was 
integral to their conditions of existence. Thus there grew up 
around crimes a network of glorification and blame; effective 
help and fear alternated with regard to this shifting 
population, which one knew was very near, but from which one 
felt that crime could emerge. Popular illegality enveloped a 
whole nucleus of criminality that was both its extreme form 
and its internal danger. 

Between this illegality of the depths and those of the 
other social castes, there was neither an exact convergence 
nor a profound opposition. Generally speaking, the different 
illegalities proper to each group maintained relations with 
one another that involved not only rivalry, competition and 
conflicts of interest, but also mutual help and complicity: 
the peasants’ refusal to pay certain state or ecclesiastical 
rents was not necessarily disapproved of by the landowners; 
the non-application by artisans of manufacturing regulations 



was often encouraged by the new entrepreneurs; smuggling - 
the story of Mandrin, welcomed by the entire population, 
received in castles and protected by parlementaires proves 
this - was very widely supported. At most, one had seen in 
the seventeenth century the different fiscal refusals 
coalesce in serious revolts among widely separated social 
strata. In short, the reciprocal interplay of illegalities 
formed part of the political and economic life of society. Or 
rather, a number of transformations (the abeyance into which 
Colbert’ s regulations had fallen, for example, the non- 
observance of customs barriers within the kingdom, the 
breakdown of guild practices) had operated in the breach that 
was being widened every day by popular illegality; the 
bourgeoisie had needed these transformations; and economic 
growth was due, in part, to them. Tolerance then became 
encouragement. 

In the second half of the eighteenth century, the process 
tended to be reversed. First, with the general increase in 
wealth, but also with the sudden demographic expansion, the 
principal target of popular illegality tended to be not so 
much rights, as goods: pilfering and theft tended to replace 
smuggling and the armed struggle against the tax agents. And, 
in this respect, the peasants, farmers and artisans were 
often its principal victims. Le Trosne was no doubt 
exaggerating a real tendency when he described the peasants’ 
suffering under the exactions of vagabonds, even more than 
they had suffered under feudal demands: thieves now attacked 
them like a cloud of maleficent insects, devouring crops and 
depleting the granaries (Le Trosne, 1764, 4). It might be 
said that gradually in the eighteenth century a crisis of 
popular illegality had occurred; and neither the movements at 
the beginning of the Revolution (around the refusal of 
seigniorial rights), nor those later movements, in which the 
struggle against property rights, political and religious 
protests and the refusal of conscription came together, 
recombined illegality in its old, welcoming form. 

Furthermore, although a large part of the bourgeoisie had 



accepted, without too much trouble, the illegality of rights, 
it found it difficult to support illegality when it was a 
question of its own property rights. Nothing could be more 
typical of this than the problem of peasant delinquency at 
the end of the eighteenth century and especially after the 
Revolution (Berce, 161). The transition to an intensive 
agriculture exercised, over the rights to use common lands, 
over various tolerated practices, over small accepted 
illegalities, a more and more restrictive pressure. 
Furthermore, as it was acquired in part by the bourgeoisie, 
now free of the feudal burdens that once weighed upon it, 
landed property became absolute property: all the tolerated 
‘rights’ that the peasantry had acquired or preserved (the 
abandonment of old obligations or the consolidation of 
irregular practices: the right of free pasture, wood¬ 
collecting, etc. ) were now rejected by the new owners who 
regarded them quite simply as theft (thus leading, among the 
people, to a series of chain reactions of an increasingly 
illegal, or, if one prefers the term, criminal kind: breaches 
of close, the theft or killing of cattle, fires, assaults, 
murders (cf. Festy and Agulhon). The illegality of rights, 
which often meant the survival of the most deprived, tended, 
with the new status of property, to become an illegality of 
property. It then had to be punished. 

And this illegality, while resented by the bourgeoisie 
where the ownership of land was concerned, was intolerable in 
commercial and industrial ownership: the development of the 
ports, the appearance of great warehouses in which 
merchandise was stored, the organization of huge workshops 
(with considerable quantities of raw materials, tools and 
manufactured articles, which belonged to the entrepreneurs 
and which were difficult to supervise) also necessitated a 
severe repression of illegality. The way in which wealth 
tended to be invested, on a much larger scale than ever 
before, in commodities and machines presupposed a systematic, 
armed intolerance of illegality. The phenomenon was obviously 
very evident where economic development was most intense. 



Colquhoun set out to give proof, supported by figures, of the 
urgent need to check the innumerable illegal practices that 
had grown up: according to the estimates of the entrepreneurs 
and insurance companies, the theft of produce imported from 
America and warehoused along the banks of the Thames had 
risen, on average, to £250,000 per annum; in all, 
approximately £500, 000 worth of goods was stolen each year in 
the Port of London itself (and this did not include the 
arsenals and warehouses outside the port proper); to this 
should be added £700,000 for the town itself. In this 
situation of permanent pilfering, three phenomena, says 
Colquhoun, should be taken into consideration: first, the 
complicity and often the active participation of the clerks, 
overseers, foremen and workers: ‘Whenever a large number of 
workers are gathered together in one place, there are bound 
to be a lot of bad characters among them’ ; second, the 
existence of a whole organization of illicit commerce, which 
began in the workshops or docks, then passed on to the 
receivers - wholesale receivers, specializing in certain 
kinds of commodity, and retail receivers whose stalls offered 
a ‘wretched display of old iron, rags and worn clothes, 
whereas at the back of the shop were hidden naval munitions 
of great value, copper bolts and nails, pieces of cast iron 
and precious metals, produce from the West Indies, furniture 
and all kinds of goods bought from the labourers’ - then on 
to dealers and pedlars who distributed the stolen goods far 
into the countryside (Colquhoun, 1797; in chapters VII, VIII 
and XV, he gives a very detailed account of this process); 
third, counterfeiting (it seems that there were between forty 
and fifty mints producing counterfeit money throughout 
England, in permanent operation). But what facilitated the 
work of this huge undertaking, involving both depredation and 
competition, was a whole set of tolerances: some amounted 
almost to acquired right (the right, for example, to collect 
bits of iron or rope around ships or to resell the sugar 
sweepings); others were of the nature of a moral acceptance; 
the pilferers themselves regarded their work as a kind of 



smuggling, which ‘they did not regard as a serious 
offence’ . 

It proved necessary, therefore, to control these illicit 
practices and introduce new legislation to cover them. The 
offences had to be properly defined and more surely punished; 
out of this mass of irregularities, sometimes tolerated and 
sometimes punished with a severity out of all proportion to 
the offence, one had to determine what was an intolerable 
offence, and the offenders had to be apprehended and 
punished. With the new forms of capital accumulation, new 
relations of production and the new legal status of property, 
all the popular practices that belonged, either in a silent, 
everyday, tolerated form, or in a violent form, to the 
illegality of rights were reduced by force to an illegality 
of property. In that movement which transformed a society of 
juridico-political levies into a society of the appropriation 
of the means and products of labour, theft tended to become 
the first of the great loopholes in legality. Or, to put it 
another way, the economy of illegalities was restructured 
with the development of capitalist society. The illegality of 
property was separated from the illegality of rights. This 
distinction represents a class opposition because, on the one 
hand, the illegality that was to be most accessible to the 
lower classes was that of property - the violent transfer of 
ownership - and because, on the other, the bourgeoisie was 
to reserve to itself the illegality of rights: the 
possibility of getting round its own regulations and its own 
laws, of ensuring for itself an immense sector of economic 
circulation by a skilful manipulation of gaps in the law - 
gaps that were foreseen by its silences, or opened up by de 
facto tolerance. And this great redistribution of 
illegalities was even to be expressed through a 
specialization of the legal circuits: for illegalities of 
property - for theft - there were the ordinary courts and 
punishments; for the illegalities of rights - fraud, tax 
evasion, irregular commercial operations - special legal 
institutions applied with transactions, accommodations, 



reduced fines, etc. The bourgeoisie reserved to itself the 
fruitful domain of the illegality of rights. And at the same 
time as this split was taking place, there emerged the need 
for a constant policing concerned essentially with this 
illegality of property. It became necessary to get rid of the 
old economy of the power to punish, based on the principles 
of the confused and inadequate multiplicity of authorities, 
the distribution and concentration of the power correlative 
with actual inertia and inevitable tolerance, punishments 
that were spectacular in their manifestations and haphazard 
in their application. It became necessary to define a 
strategy and techniques of punishment in which an economy of 
continuity and permanence would replace that of expenditure 
and excess. In short, penal reform was born at the point of 
junction between the struggle against the super-power of the 
sovereign and that against the infra-power of acquired and 
tolerated illegalities. And if penal reform was anything more 
than the temporary result of a purely circumstantial 
encounter, it was because, between this super-power and this 
infra-power, a whole network of relations was being formed. 

By placing on the side of the sovereign the additional burden 
of a spectacular, unlimited, personal, irregular and 
discontinuous power, the form of monarchical sovereignty left 
the subjects free to practise a constant illegality; this 
illegality was like the correlative of this type of power. So 
much so that in attacking the various prerogatives of the 
sovereign one was also attacking the functioning of the 
illegalities. The two objectives were in continuity. And, 
according to particular circumstances or tactics, the 
reformers laid more stress on one or the other. Le Trosne, 
the physiocrat who was a judge at the presidial court of 
Orleans, may serve as an example. In 1764, he published a 
memorandum on vagabondage: that hot-bed of thieves and 
murderers ‘who live in the midst of society without being 
members of it’ , who wage ‘a veritable war on all 
citizens’ , and who are in the midst of us ‘in that state 
that one supposes existed before the establishment of civil 



society’ . Against them, he demanded the most severe 
penalties (characteristically, he expressed surprise that one 
should be more indulgent towards them than to smugglers); he 
wanted the police to be reinforced, the mounted constabulary 
to hunt them down with the help of the population that 
suffered from their depredations; he demanded that these 
useless and dangerous people should be ‘acquired by the 
state and that they should belong to it as slaves to their 
masters’ ; and if necessary one should organize collective 
round-ups in the woods to drive them out, and anyone making a 
capture should be paid: ‘A reward of ten pounds is given for 
anyone who kills a wolf. A vagabond is infinitely more 
dangerous for society’ (Le Trosne, 1764, 8, 50, 54, 61 - 2). 
In 1777 in Vues sur la justice criminelle, the same Le Trosne 
demanded that the prerogatives of the Crown be reduced, that 
the accused be regarded as innocent until proved guilty, that 
the judge be a just arbiter between them and society, that 
laws be ‘fixed, constant, determined in the most precise 
way’ , so that subjects know ‘to what they are exposed’ and 
that magistrates be nothing more than the ‘organ of the 
law’ (Le Trosne, 1777, 31, 37, 103 - 6). For Le Trosne, as 
for so many others at that time, the struggle for the 
delimitation of the power to punish was articulated directly 
on the need to subject popular illegality to a stricter and 
more constant control. It is understandable that the 
criticism of the public execution should have assumed such 
importance in penal reform: for it was the form in which, in 
the most visible way, the unlimited power of the sovereign 
and the ever~active illegality of the people came together. 
Humanity in the sentences was the rule given to a system of 
punishment that must fix their limits on both. The ‘man’ 
that must be respected in the sentence was the juridical and 
moral form given to this double delimitation. 

But, although it is true that reform, as a penal theory and 
as a strategy of the power to punish, took shape at the point 
of coincidence of these two objectives, its stability in the 
future was due to the fact that, for a long time, priority 



was given to the second. It was because the pressure on 
popular illegalities had become, at the period of the 
Revolution, then under the Empire, and finally throughout the 
nineteenth century, an essential imperative, that reform was 
able to pass from the project stage to that of an institution 
and set of practices. That is to say, although the new 
criminal legislation appears to be characterized by less 
severe penalties, a clearer codification, a marked diminution 
of the arbitrary, a more generally accepted consensus 
concerning the power to punish (in the absence of a more real 
division in its exercise), it is sustained in reality by an 
upheaval in the traditional economy of illegalities and a 
rigorous application of force to maintain their new 
adjustment. A penal system must be conceived as a mechanism 
intended to administer illegalities differentially, not to 
eliminate them all. 

Shift the object and change the scale. Define new tactics 
in order to reach a target that is now more subtle but also 
more widely spread in the social body. Find new techniques 
for adjusting punishment to it and for adapting its effects. 
Lay down new principles for regularizing, refining, 
universalizing the art of punishing. Homogenize its 
application. Reduce its economic and political cost by 
increasing its effectiveness and by multiplying its circuits. 
In short, constitute a new economy and a new technology of 
the power to punish: these are no doubt the essential raisons 
d’ etre of penal reform in the eighteenth century. 

At the level of principles, this new strategy falls easily 
into the general theory of the contract. The citizen is 
presumed to have accepted once and for all, with the laws of 
society, the very law by which he may be punished. Thus the 
criminal appears as a juridically paradoxical being. He has 
broken the pact, he is therefore the enemy of society as a 
whole, but he participates in the punishment that is 
practised upon him. The least crime attacks the whole of 
society; and the whole of society - including the criminal 



- is present in the least punishment. Penal punishment is 
therefore a generalized function, coextensive with the 
function of the social body and with each of its elements. 
This gives rise to the problem of the degree of punishment, 
the economy of the power to punish. 

In effect the offence opposes an individual to the entire 
social body; in order to punish him, society has the right to 
oppose him in its entirety. It is an unequal struggle: on one 
side are all the forces, all the power, all the rights. And 
this is how it should be, since the defence of each 
individual is involved. Thus a formidable right to punish is 
established, since the offender becomes the common enemy. 
Indeed, he is worse than an enemy, for it is from within 
society that he delivers his blows - he is nothing less than 
a traitor, a ‘monster’ . How could society not have an 
absolute right over him? How could it not demand, quite 
simply, his elimination? And, although it is true that the 
principle of punishment must be subscribed to in the pact, 
must not each citizen, logically, accept the extreme penalty 
for those of them who attack them as a body. ‘Every 
malefactor, by attacking the social rights, becomes, by his 
crimes, a rebel and a traitor to his country; by violating 
its laws he ceases to be a member of it; he even makes war 
upon it. In such a case the preservation of the state is 
inconsistent with his own, and one or the other must perish; 
in putting the guilty to death we slay not so much the 
citizen as the enemy. ’ - The right to punish has been 
shifted from the vengeance of the sovereign to the defence of 
society. But it now finds itself recombined with elements so 
strong that it becomes almost more to be feared. The 
malefactor has been saved from a threat that is by its very 
nature excessive, but he is exposed to a penalty that seems 
to be without bounds. It is a return to a terrible ‘super¬ 
power’ . It brings with it the need to establish a principle 
of moderation for the power of punishment. 

‘Who does not shudder with horror when reading in history 
of so many terrible and useless torments, invented and coldly 


applied by monsters who took upon themselves the name of 
sage?’ (Beccaria, 87). Or again: ‘The laws summon me to the 
greatest punishment of crimes. I go with all the fury that it 
has inspired in me. But what is this? They even go beyond it 
••• God, who has imprinted in our hearts an aversion to pain 
for ourselves and for our fellow men, are they then those 
same beings, whom thou hast created so weak and so sensible, 
who have invented such barbarous, such refined tortures?’ 
(Lacretelle, 129). The principle of moderation in punishment, 
even when it is a question of punishing the enemy of the 
social body, is articulated first as a discourse of the 
heart. Or rather, it leaps forth like a cry from the body, 
which is revolted at the sight or at the imagination of too 
much cruelty. The formulation of the principle that penality 
must remain ‘humane’ is expressed by the reformers in the 
first person. It is as if the sensibility of the speaker were 
being expressed directly; as if the body of the philosopher 
or theoretician had come, between executioner and victim, to 
affirm his own law and to impose it finally on the entire 
economy of punishment. Does this lyricism express an 
inability to find a rational foundation for a penal 
arithmetic? Between the contractual principle that expels the 
criminal from society and the image of the monster 
‘vomited’ by nature, where is one to find a limit, if not 
in a human nature that is manifested - not in the rigour of 
the law, not in the ferocity of the delinquent - but in the 
sensibility of the reasonable man who makes the law and does 
not commit crime? 

But this recourse to ‘sensibility’ does not exactly 
express a theoretical impossibility. In fact, it bears within 
it a principle of calculation. The body, the imagination, 
pain, the heart to be respected are not, in effect, those of 
the criminal that is to be punished, but those of the men 
who, having subscribed to the pact, have the right of 
exercising against him the power of assembly. The pain that 
must exclude any reduction in punishment is that felt by the 
judges or spectators with all the hardness of heart that it 



may bring with it, all the ferocity induced by familiarity, 
or on the contrary, ill-founded feelings of pity and 
indulgence: ‘Thank God for those gentle, sensitive souls on 

whom those horrible executions exert a kind of torture’ 
(Lacretelle, 131). What has to be arranged and calculated are 
the return effects of punishment on the punishing authority 
and the power that it claims to exercise. 

Here the principle takes root that one should never apply 
‘inhumane’ punishments to a criminal, who, nevertheless, 
may well be a traitor and a monster. If the law must now 
treat in a ‘humane’ way an individual who is ‘outside 
nature’ (whereas the old justice treated the ‘outlaw’ 
inhumanely), it is not on account of some profound humanity 
that the criminal conceals within him, but because of a 
necessary regulation of the effects of power. It is this 
‘economic’ rationality that must calculate the penalty and 
prescribe the appropriate techniques. ‘Humanity’ is the 
respectable name given to this economy and to its meticulous 
calculations. ‘Where punishment is concerned, the minimum is 
ordered by humanity and counselled by policy. ’ - 

So, in order to understand this techno-politics of 
punishment, let us take the extreme case, the ultimate crime: 
a deed of such enormity that it violates all the most 
respected laws. It is produced in circumstances so 
extraordinary, in such profound secrecy, with such lack of 
restraint, as if at the very limit of possibility, that it 
could not be other than unique, in any case the last of its 
kind: no one could ever imitate it; no one could take it as 
an example, or even feel scandalized that it should have been 
committed. It is doomed to disappear without trace. This 
fable- of the ‘ultimate crime’ is, to the new penality, 
what original sin was to the old: the pure form in which the 
reason for punishment appears. 

Ought such a crime to be punished? According to what 
calculation? Of what use could its punishment be in the 
economy of the power to punish? It would be useful to the 
extent that it could make reparation for ‘the harm done to 


society 7 (Pastoret, II, 21). Now, if one sets aside the 
strictly material damage - which even when it is irreparable 
as in the case of a murder is of little account in relation 
to society as a whole - the injury that a crime inflicts 
upon the social body is the disorder that it introduces into 
it: the scandal that it gives rise to, the example that it 
gives, the incitement to repeat it if it is not punished, the 
possibility of becoming widespread that it bears within it. 

In order to be useful, punishment must have as its objective 
the consequences of the crime, that is to say, the series of 
disorders that it is capable of initiating: ‘The proportion 
between the penalty and the quality of the offence is 
determined by the influence that the violation of the pact 
has on the social order 7 (Filangieri, 214). But this 
influence of a crime is not necessarily in direct proportion 
to its horror; a crime that horrifies the conscience is often 
of less effect than an offence that everyone tolerates and 
feels quite ready to imitate. There is a scarcity of great 
crimes; on the other hand, there is the danger that everyday 
offences may multiply. So one must not seek a qualitative 
relation between the crime and its punishment, an equivalence 
of horror: ‘Can the cries of a wretch in torment bring back 
from the depths of a past that cannot return an action that 
has already been committed? 7 (Beccaria, 87). One must 
calculate a penalty in terms not of the crime, but of its 
possible repetition. One must take into account not the past 
offence, but the future disorder. Things must be so arranged 
that the malefactor can have neither any desire to repeat his 
offence, nor any possibility of having imitators. - 
Punishment, then, will be an art of effects; rather than 
opposing the enormity of the penalty to the enormity of the 
crime, one must adjust to one another the two series that 
follow from the crime: its own effects and those of the 
penalty. A crime without a dynasty does not call for 
punishment; any more than, according to another version of 
the same fable, a society on the verge of dissolution and 


disappearance would have the right to erect scaffolds. The 
last crime cannot but remain unpunished. 

This was an old view. The function of punishment as example 
was to be found long before the eighteenth-century reform. 
That punishment looks towards the future, and that at least 
one of its major functions is to prevent crime had, for 
centuries, been one of the current justifications of the 
right to punish. But the difference was that the prevention 
that was expected as an effect of the punishment and its 
spectacle - and therefore of its excess - tended now to 
become the principle of its economy and the measure of its 
just proportions. One must punish exactly enough to prevent 
repetition. There is, then, a shift in the mechanics of 
example: in a penality employing public torture and 
execution, example was the answer to the crime; it had, by a 
sort of twin manifestation, to show the crime and at the same 
time to show the sovereign power that mastered it; in a 
penality calculated according to its own effects, example 
must refer back to the crime, but in the most discreet way 
possible and with the greatest possible economy indicate the 
intervention of power; ideally, too, it should prevent any 
subsequent reappearance of either. The example is no longer a 
ritual that manifests; it is a sign that serves as an 
obstacle. Through this technique of punitive signs, which 
tends to reverse the whole temporal field of penal action, 
the reformers thought they were giving to the power to punish 
an economic, effective instrument that could be made general 
throughout the entire social body, capable of coding all its 
behaviour and consequently of reducing the whole diffuse 
domain of illegalities. The semio-technique with which one 
tried to arm the power to punish rested on five or six major 
rules. 

The rule of minimum quantity. A crime is committed because 
it procures certain advantages. If one linked, to the idea of 
crime, the idea of a slightly greater disadvantage, it would 
cease to be desirable. ‘For punishment to produce the effect 
that must be expected of it, it is enough that the harm that 



it causes exceed the good that the criminal has derived from 
the crime’ (Beccaria, 89). A proximity between penalty and 
crime can, indeed must, be accepted; but no longer in its old 
form, where the public execution had to be equivalent in 
intensity to the crime, with an additional factor that marked 
the ‘surplus power’ of the sovereign carrying out his 
legitimate vengeance; it is a quasi-equivalence at the level 
of interests: a little more interest in avoiding the penalty 
than in risking the crime. 

The rule of sufficient ideality. If the motive of a crime 
is the advantage expected of it, the effectiveness of the 
penalty is the disadvantage expected of it. This means that 
the ‘pain’ at the heart of punishment is not the actual 
sensation of pain, but the idea of pain, displeasure, 
inconvenience - the ‘pain’ of the idea of ‘pain’ . 
Punishment has to make use not of the body, but of 
representation. Or rather, if it does make use of the body, 
it is not so much as the subject of a pain as the object of a 
representation: the memory of pain must prevent a repetition 
of the crime, just as the spectacle, however artificial it 
may be, of a physical punishment may prevent the contagion of 
a crime. But it is not pain in itself that will be the 
instrument of the technique of punishment. Therefore, as long 
as possible, and except in cases requiring an effective 
representation, one should avoid recourse to the great 
panoply of the scaffold. There is an elision of the body as 
the subject of the punishment, but not necessarily as an 
element in a spectacle. The rejection of the public execution 
which, at the threshold of the theory, had found no more than 
a lyrical expression, was now offered the possibility of a 
rational articulation: what must be maximized is the 
representation of the penalty, not its corporal reality. 

The rule of lateral effects. The penalty must have its most 
intense effects on those who have not committed the crime; to 
carry the argument to its limit, if one could be sure that 
the criminal could not repeat the crime, it would be enough 
to make others believe that he had been punished. There is a 



centrifugal intensification of effects, which leads to the 
paradox that in the calculation of penalties the least 
important element is still the criminal (unless he is likely 
to repeat the offence). Beccaria illustrated this paradox in 
the punishment that he proposed to replace the death sentence 
- perpetual slavery. Is this not a physically more cruel 
punishment than death? Not at all, he says: because the pain 
of slavery, for the condemned man, is divided into as many 
portions as he has moments left to live; it is an infinitely 
divisible penalty, an Eleatic penalty, much less severe than 
capital punishment, which is only one step away from the 
public execution. On the other hand, for those who see these 
slaves, or represent them to themselves, the pains they bear 
are concentrated into a single idea; all the moments of 
slavery are contracted into a representation that then 
becomes more terrifying than the idea of death. It is the 
economically ideal punishment: it is minimal for him who 
undergoes it (and who, reduced to slavery, cannot repeat his 
crime) and it is maximal for him who represents it to 
himself. ‘Among the penalties, and in the way of applying 
them in proportion to the offences, one must choose the means 
that will leave the most lasting impression on the minds of 
the people, and the least cruel on the body of the criminal’ 
(Beccaria, 87). 

The rule of perfect certainty. With the idea of each crime 
and the advantages to be expected of it must be associated 
the idea of a particular punishment with the precise 
inconveniences that result from it; the link from one to the 
other must be regarded as necessary and unbreakable. This 
general element of certainty that must give the system of 
punishment its effectiveness involves a number of precise 
measures. The laws that define the crime and lay down the 
penalties must be perfectly clear, ‘so that each member of 
society may distinguish criminal actions from virtuous 
actions’ (Brissot, 24). These laws must be published, so 
that everyone has access to them; what is needed is not oral 
traditions and customs, but a written legislation which can 



be ‘the stable monument of the social pact’ , printed texts 
available to all: ‘Only printing can make the public as a 
whole and not just a few persons depositories of the sacred 
code of the laws’ (Beccaria, 26). The monarch must renounce 
his right of pardon so that the force that is present in the 
idea of punishment is not attenuated by the hope of 
intervention: ‘If one allows men to see that the crime may 

be pardoned and that punishment is not a necessary 
consequence of it, one nourishes in them the hope of going 
unpunished ••• The laws must be inexorable, those who execute 
them inflexible.’ - Above all, no crime committed must 
escape the gaze of those whose task it is to dispense 
justice. Nothing so weakens the machinery of the law than the 
hope of going unpunished; how could one establish in the 
minds of the public a strict link between the offence and a 
penalty if it were affected by a certain coefficient of 
improbability? Would it not be necessary to make the penalty 
the more to be feared in its violence as it is less to be 
feared in its uncertainty? Rather than imitate the old system 
in this way and be ‘more severe, one must be more 
vigilant’ . — Hence the idea that the machinery of justice 
must be duplicated by an organ of surveillance that would 
work side by side with it, and which would make it possible 
either to prevent crimes, or, if committed, to arrest their 
authors; police and justice must work together as two 
complementary actions of the same process - the police 
assuring ‘the action of society on each individual’ , 
justice ‘the rights of individuals against society’ 

(Duport, Archives parlementaires, XXI, 45). Thus every crime 
will come to the light of day and be punished in all 
certainty. But it is also necessary that the legal procedures 
should not remain secret, that the reasons why a defendant is 
condemned or acquitted should be known to all, and each 
individual must be able to recognize the reasons for a 
penalty: ‘Let the magistrate speak his opinion aloud, let 

him be obliged to read in his judgement the text of the law 
that condemns the defendant ••• Let the procedures that are 


buried mysteriously in the obscurity of the records office be 
opened to all citizens who are concerned at the fate of the 
condemned’ (Mably, 348). 

The rule of common truth. Beneath this ordinary-seeming 
principle is hidden an important transformation. The old 
system of legal proofs, the use of torture, the extraction of 
confessions, the use of the public execution, the body and 
spectacle for the reproduction of truth had long isolated 
penal practice from the common forms of demonstration: semi¬ 
proofs produced semi-truths and semi-guilty persons, words 
extracted by pain had greater authenticity, presumption 
involved a degree of punishment. The heterogeneity of this 
system with the ordinary system of proof really constituted a 
scandal only when the power to punish needed, for its own 
economy, a climate of irrefutable certainty. How can one link 
absolutely in the minds of men the idea of crime and the idea 
of punishment, if the reality of the punishment does not 
follow, in all cases, the reality of the offence? To 
establish the offence, in all evidence, and according to the 
means valid for all, becomes a task of first importance. The 
verification of the crime must obey the general criteria for 
all truth. In the arguments it employs, in the proofs it 
provides, legal judgement must be homogeneous with judgement 
in general. There is, therefore, an abandonment of legal 
proof, a rejection of torture, the need for a complete 
demonstration of the truth, an effacement of all correlation 
between degrees of suspicion and degrees of punishment. Like 
a mathematical truth, the truth of the crime will be accepted 
only when it is completely proven. It follows that, up to the 
final demonstration of his crime, the defendant must be 
regarded as innocent; and that, in order to carry out this 
demonstration, the judge must use not ritual forms, but 
common instruments, that reason possessed by everyone, which 
is also that of philosophers and scientists: ‘In theory, I 
regard the magistrate as a philosopher who sets out to 
discover an interesting truth ••• His sagacity will enable him 
to grasp all the circumstances and all the relations, bring 



together or separate whatever needs to be brought together or 
separated in order to arrive at a sane judgement’ (Seigneux 
de Correvon, 49). The investigation, the exercise of common 
reason, lays aside the old inquisitorial model and adopts the 
much more subtle model (doubly validated by science and 
common sense) of empirical research. The judge will be like a 
‘pilot steering between the rocks’ : ‘What proofs or what 
clues will be considered to be sufficient neither I nor 
anyone else has dared to determine in general; since 
circumstances are subject to infinite variations, since 
proofs and clues must be deduced from these circumstances, 
the clearest clues and proofs must necessarily vary in 
proportion’ (Risi, 53). Henceforth, penal practice was to be 
subject to a common rule of truth, or rather to a complex 
rule in which heterogeneous elements of scientific 
demonstration, the evidence of the senses and common sense 
come together to form the judge’ s ‘deep-seated 
conviction’ . Although penal justice preserves the forms that 
guarantee its equity, it may now be opened up to all manner 
of truths, providing they are evident, well founded, 
acceptable to all. The legal ritual in itself no longer 
generates a divided truth. It is resituated in the field of 
reference of common proofs. With the multiplicity of 
scientific discourses, a difficult, infinite relation was 
then forged that penal justice is still unable to control. 

The master of justice is no longer the master of its truth. 

The rule of optimal specification. For penal semiotics to 
cover the whole field of illegalities that one wishes to 
eliminate, all offences must be defined; they must be 
classified and collected into species from which none of them 
can escape. A code is therefore necessary and this code must 
be sufficiently precise for each type of offence to be 
clearly present in it. The silence of the law must not 
harbour the hope of impunity. An exhaustive, explicit code is 
required, defining crimes and fixing penalties. (On this 
theme, cf. , among others, Linguet, 8. ) But the same 
imperative need for a total coincidence between all possible 



offences and the effects-signs of punishment forces one to go 
further. The idea of the same punishment does not have the 
same effect on everyone: the rich do not fear fines nor the 
notorious infamy. The injury caused by an offence and its 
value as example differ according to the status of the 
offender; a crime committed by a noble is more injurious to 
society than one committed by a man of the people 
(Lacretelle, 144). Lastly, since punishment must prevent a 
repetition of the offence, it must take into account the 
profound nature of the criminal himself, the presumable 
degree of his wickedness, the intrinsic quality of his will: 

‘Of two men who have committed the same theft, how much less 
guilty is he who scarcely had the necessities of life than he 
who overflowed with excess? Of two perjurers, how much more 
criminal is he on whom one has striven from his childhood to 
impress feelings of honour than he who, abandoned to nature, 
never received the benefit of education’ (Marat, 34). One 
sees the emergence at the same time of the need for a 
parallel classification of crimes and punishments, the need 
for an individualization of sentences, in accordance with the 
particular characteristics of each criminal. This 
individualization was to weigh very heavily throughout the 
history of modern penal law; it is rooted precisely here: in 
terms of the theory of law and according to the requirements 
of everyday practice, it is no doubt in radical opposition to 
the principle of codification; but from the standpoint of the 
economy of the power to punish, and of the techniques by 
which one wishes to circulate throughout the social body 
precisely calibrated signs of punishment, with neither 
excesses nor loopholes, with neither a useless 
‘expenditure’ of power nor with timidity, it becomes 
evident that the codification of the offences - punishments 
system and the modulation of the criminal - punishment dyad go 
side by side, each requiring the other. Individualization 
appears as the ultimate aim of a precisely adapted code. 

But this individualization is very different in its nature 
from the modulations of punishment to be found in the old 



jurisprudence. The old system - and on this point it 
followed Christian penitentiary practice - used two series 
of variables to adjust the punishment, those of 
‘circumstances’ and those of ‘intention’ ; elements, that 
is to say, that made it possible to qualify the act itself. 
The modulation of the penalty belonged to ‘casuistry’ in 
the broad sense. (On the non-individualizing character of 
casuistry, cf. Cariou.) But what was now beginning to emerge 
was a modulation that referred to the defendant himself, to 
his nature, to his way of life and his attitude of mind, to 
his past, to the ‘quality’ and not to the intention of his 
will. One perceives, but as a place as yet unfilled, the 
locus in which, in penal practice, psychological knowledge 
will take over the role of casuistic jurisprudence. Of 
course, at the end of the eighteenth century, that moment was 
still far off. The code - individualization link was sought in 
the scientific models of the period. Natural history no doubt 
offered the most adequate schema: the taxonomy of species 
according to an uninterrupted gradation. One sought to 
constitute a Linnaeus of crimes and punishments, so that each 
particular offence and each punishable individual might come, 
without the slightest risk of any arbitrary action, within 
the provisions of a general law. ‘A table must be drawn up 
of all the genera of crimes to be observed in different 
countries. According to the enumeration of crimes, a division 
into species must be carried out. The best rule of this 
division is, it seems to me, to separate the crimes according 
to their objects. This division must be such that each 
species is quite distinct from another, and that each 
particular crime, considered in all its relations may be 
placed between that which must precede it and that which must 
follow it, in the strictest gradation; lastly, this table 
must be such that it may be compared with another table that 
will be drawn up for penalties, in such a way that they may 
correspond exactly to one another’ (Lacretelle, 351 - 352). 

In theory, or rather in dream, the double taxonomy of 



punishments and crimes will solve the problem: but how is one 
to apply fixed laws to particular individuals? 

Far removed from this speculative model, forms of 
anthropological individualization were being constituted at 
the same period in what was still a very rough and ready way. 
Let us take first the notion of the repetition of crime. Not 
that this was unknown to the old criminal laws. — But it was 
tending to become a description of the defendant himself 
capable of altering the sentence passed: according to the 
legislation of 1791, recidivists were liable in almost all 
cases to a doubling of the penalty; according to the law of 
Floreal Year X, they had to be branded with the letter R; and 
the penal code of 1810 inflicted on them either the maximum 
possible of the normal penalty, or the penalty immediately 
above it. Now, through the repetition of the crime, what one 
was aiming at was not the author of an act defined by law, 
but the delinquent subject himself, a certain will that 
manifested his intrinsically criminal character. Gradually, 
as criminality, rather than crime, became the object of penal 
intervention, the opposition between first offender and 
recidivist tended to become more important. And on the basis 
of this opposition, reinforcing it on several points, one 
sees at the same period the formation of the notion of the 
'crime passionel ' - an involuntary, unpremeditated crime, 

bound up with extraordinary circumstances, which, while not 
offering the same excuse as madness, nevertheless prevented 
it from being regarded as an ordinary crime. As early as 
1791, Le Peletier remarked that the subtle gradation of 
penalties that he had presented to the Constituent Assembly 
might dissuade from crime ‘the evil-doer who plans a wicked 
action in cold blood’ , and who may be restrained by thoughts 
of the penalty; but, on the other hand, it was powerless 
against crimes due to ‘violent passions that have no regard 
to consequences’ ; this, however, was unimportant, since such 
crimes revealed in their authors ‘no reasoned 
wickedness.’ — 


Beneath the humanization of the penalties, what one finds 
are all those rules that authorize, or rather demand, 

‘leniency’ , as a calculated economy of the power to punish. 
But they also provoke a shift in the point of application of 
this power: it is no longer the body, with the ritual play of 
excessive pains, spectacular brandings in the ritual of the 
public execution; it is the mind or rather a play of 
representations and signs circulating discreetly but 
necessarily and evidently in the minds of all. It is no 
longer the body, but the soul, said Mably. And we see very 
clearly what he meant by this term: the correlative of a 
technique of power. Old ‘anatomies’ of punishment are 
abandoned. But have we really entered the age of non-corporal 
punishment? 

At the point of departure, then, one may place the 
political project of rooting out illegalities, generalizing 
the punitive function and delimiting, in order to control it, 
the power to punish. From this there emerge two lines of 
objectification of crime and of the criminal. On the one 
hand, the criminal designated as the enemy of all, whom it is 
in the interest of all to track down, falls outside the pact, 
disqualifies himself as a citizen and emerges, bearing within 
him as it were, a wild fragment of nature; he appears as a 
villain, a monster, a madman, perhaps, a sick and, before 
long, ‘abnormal’ individual. It is as such that, one day, 
he will belong to a scientific objectification and to the 
‘treatment’ that is correlative to it. On the other hand, 
the need to measure, from within, the effects of the punitive 
power prescribes tactics of intervention over all criminals, 
actual or potential: the organization of a field of 
prevention, the calculation of interests, the circulation of 
representations and signs, the constitution of a horizon of 
certainty and proof, the adjustment of penalties to ever more 
subtle variables; all this also leads to an objectification 
of criminals and crimes. In either case, one sees that the 
power relation that underlies the exercise of punishment 



begins to be duplicated by an object relation in which are 
caught up not only the crime as a fact to be established 
according to common norms, but the criminal as an individual 
to be known according to specific criteria. One also sees 
that this object relation is not superimposed, from the 
outside, on the punitive practice, as would be a prohibition 
laid on the fury of the public execution by the limits of the 
sensibility, or as would be a rational or ‘scientific’ 
interrogation as to what this man that one is punishing 
really is. The processes of objectification originate in the 
very tactics of power and of the arrangement of its exercise. 

However, the two types of objectification that emerge with 
the project of penal reform are very different from one 
another: both in their chronology and in their effects. The 
objectification of the criminal as outside the law, as 
natural man, is still only a potentiality, a vanishing trace, 
in which are entangled the themes of political criticism and 
the figures of the imagination. One will have to wait a long 
time before homo criminal is becomes a definite object in the 
field of knowledge. The other, on the contrary, has had much 
more rapid and decisive effects in so far as it was linked 
more directly to the reorganization of the power to punish: 
codification, definition of offences, the fixing of a scale 
of penalties, rules of procedure, definition of the role of 
magistrates. And also because it made use of the discourse 
already constituted by the Ideologues. This discourse 
provided, in effect, by means of the theory of interests, 
representations and signs, by the series and geneses that it 
reconstituted, a sort of general recipe for the exercise of 
power over men: the ‘mind’ as a surface of inscription for 
power, with semiology as its tool; the submission of bodies 
through the control of ideas; the analysis of representations 
as a principle in a politics of bodies that was much more 
effective than the ritual anatomy of torture and execution. 
The thought of the Ideologues was not only a theory of the 
individual and society; it developed as a technology of 
subtle, effective, economic powers, in opposition to the 



sumptuous expenditure of the power of the sovereign. Let us 
hear once more what Servan has to say: the ideas of crime and 
punishment must be strongly linked and ‘follow one another 
without interruption ••• When you have thus formed the chain 
of ideas in the heads of your citizens, you will then be able 
to pride yourselves on guiding them and being their masters. 

A stupid despot may constrain his slaves with iron chains; 
but a true politician binds them even more strongly by the 
chain of their own ideas; it is at the stable point of reason 
that he secures the end of the chain; this link is all the 
stronger in that we do not know of what it is made and we 
believe it to be our own work; despair and time eat away the 
bonds of iron and steel, but they are powerless against the 
habitual union of ideas, they can only tighten it still more; 
and on the soft fibres of the brain is founded the unshakable 
base of the soundest of Empires’ (Servan, 35). 

It is this semio-technique of punishments, this 
‘ideological power’ which, partly at least, will remain in 
suspense and will be superseded by a new political anatomy, 
in which the body, once again, but in a new form, will be the 
principal character. And this new political anatomy will 
permit the intersection of the two divergent lines of 
objectification that are to be seen emerging in the 
eighteenth century: that which rejects the criminal ‘from 
the other side’ - from the side of a nature against nature; 
and that which seeks to control delinquency by a calculated 
economy of punishments. A glance at the new art of punishing 
clearly reveals the supersession of the punitive semio- 
technique by a new politics of the body. 



2. The gentle way in punishment 


The art of punishing, then, must rest on a whole technology 
of representation. The undertaking can succeed only if it 
forms part of a natural mechanics. ‘Like the gravitation of 
bodies, a secret force compels us ever towards our well¬ 
being. This impulsion is affected only by the obstacles that 
laws oppose to it. All the diverse actions of man are the 
effects of this interior tendency.’ To find the suitable 
punishment for a crime is to find the disadvantage whose idea 
is such that it robs for ever the idea of a crime of any 
attraction. It is an art of conflicting energies, an art of 
images linked by association, the forging of stable 
connections that defy time: it is a matter of establishing 
the representation of pairs of opposing values, of 
establishing quantitative differences between the opposing 
forces, of setting up a complex of obstacle-signs that may 
subject the movement of the forces to a power relation. ‘Let 
the idea of torture and execution be ever present in the 
heart of the weak man and dominate the feeling that drives 
him to crime’ (Beccaria, 119). These obstacle-signs must 
constitute the new arsenal of penalties, just as the old 
public executions were organized around a system of 
retaliatory marks. But in order to function, they must obey 
several conditions. 

1. They must be as unarbitrary as possible. It is true that 
it is society that defines, in terms of its own interests, 
what must be regarded as a crime: it is not therefore 
natural. But, if punishment is to present itself to the mind 
as soon as one thinks of committing a crime, as immediate a 



link as possible must be made between the two: a link of 
resemblance, analogy, proximity. ‘The penalty must be made 
to conform as closely as possible to the nature of the 
offence, so that fear of punishment diverts the mind from the 
road along which the prospect of an advantageous crime was 
leading it’ (Beccaria, 119). The ideal punishment would be 
transparent to the crime that it punishes; thus, for him who 
contemplates it, it will be infallibly the sign of the crime 
that it punishes; and for him who dreams of the crime, the 
idea of the offence will be enough to arouse the sign of the 
punishment. This is an advantage for the stability of the 
link, an advantage for the calculation of the proportions 
between crime and punishment and the quantitative reading of 
interests; it also has the advantage that, by assuming the 
form of a natural sequence, punishment does not appear as the 
arbitrary effect of a human power: ‘To derive the offence 
from the punishment is the best means of proportioning 
punishment to crime. If this is the triumph of justice, it is 
also the triumph of liberty, for then penalties no longer 
proceed from the will of the legislator, but from the nature 
of things; one no longer sees man committing violence on 
man’ (Marat, 33). In analogical punishment, the power that 
punishes is hidden. 

The reformers proposed a whole panoply of penalties that 
were natural by institution and which represented in their 
form the content of the crime. Take Vermeil, for example: 
those who abuse public liberty will be deprived of their own; 
those who abuse the benefits of law and the privileges of 
public office will be deprived of their civil rights; 
speculation and usury will be punished by fines; theft will 
be punished by confiscation; ‘vainglory’ by humiliation; 
murder by death; fire-raising by the stake. In the case of 
the poisoner, ‘the executioner will present him with a 
goblet the contents of which will be thrown into his face; 
thus he will be made to feel the horror of his crime by being 
offered an image of it; he will then be thrown into a 
cauldron of boiling water’ (Vermeil, 68 - 145; cf. also 



Dufriche de Valaze, 349) Mere day-dreaming? Perhaps. But the 
principle of a symbolic communication was clearly formulated 
by Le Peletier, when in 1791 he presented the new criminal 
legislation: ‘Exact relations are required between the 

nature of the offence and the nature of the punishment’ ; he 
who has used violence in his crime must be subjected to 
physical pain; he who has been lazy must be sentenced to hard 
labour; he who has acted despicably will be subjected to 
infamy (Le Peletier, 321-2). 

Despite cruelties that are strongly reminiscent of the 
tortures of the Ancien Regime, a quite different mechanism is 
at work in these analogical penalties. Horror is not opposed 
to horror in a joust of power; it is no longer the symmetry 
of vengeance, but the transparency of the sign to that which 
it signifies; what is required is to establish, in the 
theatre of punishments, a relation that is immediately 
intelligible to the senses and on which a simple calculation 
may be based: a sort of reasonable aesthetic of punishment. 

‘It is not only in the fine arts that one must follow nature 
faithfully; political institutions, at least those that 
display wisdom and permanence, are founded on nature’ 
(Beccaria, 114). The punishment must proceed from the crime; 
the law must appear to be a necessity of things, and power 
must act while concealing itself beneath the gentle force of 
nature. 

2. This complex of signs must engage with the mechanics of 
forces: reduce the desire that makes the crime attractive; 
increase the interest that makes the penalty be feared; 
reverse the relation of intensities, so that the 
representation of the penalty and its disadvantages is more 
lively than that of the crime and its pleasures. There is a 
whole mechanics, therefore, of interest, of its movement, of 
the way that one represents it to oneself and of the 
liveliness of this representation. ‘The legislator must be a 
skilful architect who knows how to employ all the forces that 
may contribute to the solidity of the building and reduce all 
those that might ruin it’ (Beccaria, 135). 



There are several ways of achieving this. ‘Go straight to 
the source of evil’ (Mably, 246). Smash the mainspring that 
animates the representation of the crime. Weaken the interest 
that brought it to birth. Behind the offences of the 
vagabond, there is laziness; that is what one must fight 
against. ‘One will not succeed by locking beggars up in 
filthy prisons that are more like cesspools’ ; they will have 
to be forced to work. ‘The best way of punishing them is to 
employ them’ (Brissot, 258). Against a bad passion, a good 
habit; against a force, another force, but it must be the 
force of sensibility and passion, not that of armed power. 

‘Must one not deduce all penalties from this principle, 
which is so simple, so appropriate and already well known, 
namely, to choose them in that which is most subduing for the 
passion that led to the crime committed?’ (Lacretelle, 361). 

Set the force that drove the criminal to the crime against 
itself. Divide interest, use it to make the penalty something 
to be feared. Let the punishment irritate it and stimulate it 
more than the crime was able to flatter it. If pride led to 
the committing of a crime, let it be hurt, let the punishment 
disgust it. Shameful punishments are effective because they 
are based on the vanity that was at the root of the crime. 
Fanatics glory both in their opinions and in the tortures 
that they endure for them. Let us, therefore, set against 
fanaticism the proud obstinacy that sustains it: ‘Reduce it 
with ridicule and shame; if one humiliates the proud vanity 
of fanatics before a great crowd of spectators, one may 
expect happy effects from this punishment. ’ It would be 
quite useless, on the other hand, to impose physical pain on 
them. (Beccaria, 113). 

Reanimate the useful, virtuous interest that has been so 
weakened by the crime. The feeling of respect for property - 
for wealth, but also for honour, liberty, life - this the 
criminal loses when he robs, calumniates, abducts or kills. 

So he must be taught this feeling once again. And one will 
begin by teaching it to him for his own benefit; one will 
show him what it is to lose the freedom to dispose as one 



wishes of one 7 s own wealth, honour, time and body, so that 
he may respect it in others (Pastoret, I, 49). The penalty 
that forms stable and easily legible signs must also 
recompose the economy of interests and the dynamics of 
passions. 

3. Consequently, one must use a temporal modulation. The 
penalty transforms, modifies, establishes signs, arranges 
obstacles. What use would it be if it had to be permanent? A 
penalty that had no end would be contradictory: all the 
constraints that it imposes on the convict and of which, 
having become virtuous once more, he would never be able to 
take advantage, would be little better than torture; and the 
effort made to reform him would be so much trouble and 
expense lost by society. If incorrigibles there be, one must 
be determined to eliminate them. But, for all the others, 
punishment can function only if it comes to an end. This 
analysis was accepted by the Constituent Assembly: the code 
of 1791 lays down the death penalty for traitors and 
murderers; all other penalties must have an end (the maximum 
is twenty years). 

But above all the role of duration must be integrated into 
the economy of the penalty. In its very violence, the public 
execution tended to have the following result: the more 
serious the crime, the shorter the punishment. Duration 
certainly intervened in the old system of penalties; days at 
the pillory, years of banishment, hours spent dying on the 
wheel. But it was a time of ordeal, not of concerted 
transformation. Duration must now facilitate the proper 
action of the punishment: ‘A prolonged succession of painful 
privations, sparing mankind the horror of torture, has much 
more effect on the guilty party than a passing moment of pain 
••• It constantly renews in the eyes of the people that 
witness it the memory of vengeful laws and revives in all the 
moments of a salutary terror. ’ - Time, operator of 
punishment. 

But the delicate mechanism of the passions must not be 
constrained in the same way or with the same insistence when 


they begin to improve; the punishment should diminish as it 
produces its effects. It may well be fixed, in the sense that 
it is determined for all, in the same way, by law, but its 
internal mechanism must be variable. In the bill put before 
the Constituent Assembly, Le Peletier proposed a system of 
diminishing penalties: a convict condemned to the most 
serious penalty would be subjected to the ' cachot’ 

(manacles on hands and feet, darkness, solitude, bread and 
water) only during the first stage of his imprisonment; he 
would be allowed to work first two then three days a week. 
After two thirds of his sentence had been served, he could 
pass to the ‘gene’ (a cell with light, chain around the 
waist, solitary work for five hours a day, but with other 
prisoners on the other two days; this work would be paid and 
would enable him to improve his daily fare). Lastly, when he 
approached the end of his sentence, he could pass to the 
normal prison regime: ‘He will be allowed every day to meet 
other prisoners for work in common. If he prefers, he will be 
able to work alone. He will pay for his food from what he 
earns from his work’ (Le Peletier, 329 - 30). 

4. For the convict, the penalty is a mechanics of signs, 
interests and duration. But the guilty person is only one of 
the targets of punishment. For punishment is directed above 
all at others, at all the potentially guilty. So these 
obstacle-signs that are gradually engraved in the 
representation of the condemned man must therefore circulate 
rapidly and widely; they must be accepted and redistributed 
by all; they must shape the discourse that each individual 
has with others and by which crime is forbidden to all by all 
- the true coin that is substituted in people’ s minds for 
the false profits of crime. 

For this, everyone must see punishment not only as natural, 
but in his own interest; everyone must be able to read in it 
his own advantage. There must be no more spectacular, but 
useless penalties. There must be no secret penalties either; 
but punishment must be regarded as a retribution that the 
guilty man makes to each of his fellow citizens, for the 



crime that has wronged them all - penalties that are 
constantly placed before citizens’ eyes, and which ‘bring 
out the public utility of common and particular movements’ 
(Dufriche de Valaze, 346). The ideal would be for the convict 
to appear as a sort of rentable property: a slave at the 
service of all. Why would society eliminate a life and a body 
that it could appropriate? It would be more useful to make 
him ‘serve the state in a slavery that would be more or less 
extended according to the nature of his crime’ ; France has 
all too many impracticable roads that impede trade; thieves 
who also obstruct the free circulation of goods could be put 
to rebuilding the highways. Far more telling than death would 
be ‘the example of a man who is ever before one’ s eyes, 
whom one has deprived of liberty and who is forced to spend 
the rest of his days repairing the loss that he has caused 
society’ (Boucher d’ Argis, 1781, 139). 

In the old system, the body of the condemned man became the 
king’ s property, on which the sovereign left his mark and 
brought down the effects of his power. Now he will be rather 
the property of society, the object of a collective and 
useful appropriation. This explains why the reformers almost 
always proposed public works as one of the best possible 
penalties; in this, they were supported by the Cahiers de 
doleances'. ‘Let those condemned to penalties short of death 
be put to the public works of the country for a time 
proportionate to their crime. ’ - Public works meant two 
things: the collective interest in the punishment of the 
condemend man and the visible, verifiable character of the 
punishment. Thus the convict pays twice; by the labour he 
provides and by the signs that he produces. At the heart of 
society, on the public squares or highways, the convict is a 
focus of profit and signification. Visibly, he is serving 
everyone; but, at the same time, he lets slip into the minds 
of all the crime-punishment sign: a secondary, purely moral, 
but much more real utility. 

5. Hence a whole learned economy of publicity. In physical 
torture, the example was based on terror: physical fear, 


collective horror, images that must be engraved on the 
memories of the spectators, like the brand on the cheek or 
shoulder of the condemned man. The example is now based on 
the lesson, the discourse, the decipherable sign, the 
representation of public morality. It is no longer the 
terrifying restoration of sovereignty that will sustain the 
ceremony of punishment, but the reactivation of the code, the 
collective reinforcements of the link between the idea of 
crime and the idea of punishment. In the penalty, rather than 
seeing the presence of the sovereign, one will read the laws 
themselves. The laws associated a particular crime with a 
particular punishment. As soon as the crime is committed, the 
punishment will follow at once, enacting the discourse of the 
law and showing that the code, which links ideas, also links 
realities. The junction, immediate in the text, must be 
immediate in acts. ‘Consider those first movements in which 
the news of some horrible act spreads through our towns and 
countryside; the citizens are like men who see lightning 
falling about them; everyone is moved by indignation and 
horror ••• That is the moment to punish the crime: do not let 
it slip by; hasten to prove it and judge it. Set up 
scaffolds, stakes, drag out the guilty man to the public 
squares, summon the people with great cries; you will then 
hear them applaud the proclamation of your judgements, as the 
proclamation of peace and liberty; you will see them run to 
these terrible spectacles as to the triumph of the laws’ 
(Servan, 35-6). Public punishment is the ceremony of 
immediate recoding. 

The law is re-formed: it takes up its place on the side of 
the crime that violated it. The criminal, on the other hand, 
is detached from society, he leaves it. But not in those 
ambiguous festivals of the Ancien Regime in which the people 
inevitably took part, either in the crime or in the 
execution, but in a ceremony of mourning. The society that 
has rediscovered its laws has lost the citizen who violated 
them. Public punishment must manifest this double affliction: 
that a citizen should have been capable of ignoring the law 



and that one should have been obliged to separate oneself 
from a citizen. ‘Associate the scaffold with the most 
lugubrious and most moving ceremonies; let this terrible day 
be a day of mourning for the nation; let the general sorrow 
be painted everywhere in bold letters ••• Let the magistrate, 
wearing black, funereal crepe, announce the crime and the sad 
necessity of a legal vengeance to the people. Let the 
different scenes of this tragedy strike all the senses, stir 
all gentle, honest affections’ (Dufau, 688). 

The meaning of this mourning must be clear to all; each 
element of its ritual must speak, repeat the crime, recall 
the law, show the need for punishment and justify its degree. 
Posters, placards, signs, symbols must be distributed, so 
that everyone may learn their significations. The publicity 
of punishment must not have the physical effect of terror; it 
must open up a book to be read. Le Peletier suggested that, 
once a month, the people should be allowed to visit convicts, 
‘in their mournful cells: they will read, written in bold 
letters above the door, the name of the convict, his crime 
and his sentence’ (Le Peletier, 329 - 30). And in the simple, 
military style of the imperial ceremonies, Bexon was to 
imagine some years later a whole tableau of penal heraldry: 

‘The prisoner condemned to death will be taken to the 
scaffold in a cart “hung or painted in black and red” ; if 
he is a traitor, he will wear a red coat on which will be 
inscribed, in front and behind, the word “traitor” ; if he 
is a parricide, his head will be covered with a black veil 
and on his shirt will be embroidered daggers or whatever 
instruments of death he used; if he is a poisoner, his red 
shirt will be decorated with snakes and other venomous 
animals’ (Bexon, 24-5 - this project was presented to the 
King of Bavaria). 

This legible lesson, this ritual recoding, must be repeated 
as often as possible; the punishments must be a school rather 
than a festival; an ever~open book rather than a ceremony. 

The duration that makes the punishment effective for the 
guilty is also useful for the spectators. They must be able 



to consult at each moment the permanent lexicon of crime and 
punishment. A secret punishment is a punishment half wasted. 
Children should be allowed to come to the places where the 
penalty is being carried out; there they will attend their 
classes in civics. And grown men will periodically relearn 
the laws. Let us conceive of places of punishment as a Garden 
of the Laws that families would visit on Sundays. ‘I propose 
that, from time to time, after preparing people’ s minds with 
a reasoned discourse on the preservation of the social order, 
on the utility of punishment, men as well as boys should be 
taken to the mines and to the work camps and contemplate the 
frightful fate of these outlaws. Such pilgrimages would be 
more useful than the pilgrimages made by the Turks to Mecca’ 
(Brissot). And Le Peletier considered that this visibility of 
punishment was one of the fundamental principles of the new 
penal code: ‘Often, at certain special times, the presence 
of the people must bring down shame upon the heads of the 
guilty; and the presence of the guilty person in the pitiful 
state to which his crime has reduced him must bring useful 
instruction to the souls of the people’ (Le Peletier, 322). 
Long before he was regarded as an object of science, the 
criminal was imagined as a source of instruction. Once one 
made charitable visits to prisoners to share in their 
sufferings (the seventeenth century had invented or revived 
this practice); now it was being suggested that children 
should come and learn how the benefits of the law are applied 
to crime - a living lesson in the museum of order. 

6. This will make possible in society an inversion of the 
traditional discourse of crime. How can one extinguish the 
dubious glory of the criminal? This was a matter of grave 
concern to the lawmakers of the eighteenth century. How can 
one silence the adventures of the great criminals celebrated 
in the almanacs, broadsheets and popular tales? If the 
recoding of punishment is well done, if the ceremony of 
mourning takes place as it should, the crime can no longer 
appear as anything but a misfortune and the criminal as an 
enemy who must be re-educated into social life. Instead of 



those songs of praise that turn the criminal into a hero, 
only those obstacle-signs that arrest the desire to commit 
the crime by the calculated fear of punishment will circulate 
in men’ s discourse. The positive mechanics will operate to 
the full in the language of every day, which will constantly 
reinforce it with new accounts. Discourse will become the 
vehicle of the law: the constant principle of universal 
recoding. The poets of the people will at last join those who 
call themselves the ‘missionaries of eternal reason’ ; they 
will become moralists. ‘Filled with these terrible images 
and salutary ideas, each citizen will spread them through his 
family and there, by long accounts delivered with as much 
fervour as they are avidly listened to, his children gathered 
around him, will open up their young memories to receive, in 
imperishable lineaments, the notion of crime and punishment, 
the love of law and country, the respect and trust of the 
magistrature. Country people, too, will be witnesses of these 
examples and will sow them around their huts, the taste of 
virtue will take root in these coarse souls, while the evil¬ 
doer, dismayed at the public joy, fearful at the sight of so 
many enemies, may abandon plans whose outcome will be as 
prompt as it is gloomy’ (Servan, 37). 

This, then, is how one must imagine the punitive city. At 
the crossroads, in the gardens, at the side of roads being 
repaired or bridges built, in workshops open to all, in the 
depths of mines that may be visited, will be hundreds of tiny 
theatres of punishment. Each crime will have its law; each 
criminal his punishment. It will be a visible punishment, a 
punishment that tells all, that explains, justifies itself, 
convicts: placards, different-coloured caps bearing 
inscriptions, posters, symbols, texts read or printed, 
tirelessly repeat the code. Scenery, perspectives, optical 
effects, trompe-1’ oeil sometimes magnify the scene, making it 
more fearful than it is, but also clearer. From where the 
public is sitting, it is possible to believe in the existence 
of certain cruelties which, in fact, do not take place. But 
the essential point, in all these real or magnified 



severities, is that they should all, according to a strict 
economy, teach a lesson: that each punishment should be a 
fable. And that, in counterpoint with all the direct examples 
of virtue, one may at each moment encounter, as a living 
spectacle, the misfortunes of vice. Around each of these 
moral ‘representations’ , schoolchildren will gather with 
their masters and adults will learn what lessons to teach 
their offspring. The great terrifying ritual of the public 
execution gives way, day after day, street after street, to 
this serious theatre, with its multifarious and persuasive 
scenes. And popular memory will reproduce in rumour the 
austere discourse of the law. But perhaps it will be 
necessary, above these innumerable spectacles and narratives, 
to place the major sign of punishment for the most terrible 
of crimes: the keystone of the penal edifice. In any case, 
Vermeil had imagined the scene of absolute punishment that 
should dominate all the theatres of everyday punishment: the 
only case in which one had to seek to reach an infinity of 
punishment, something equivalent in the new penal system to 
what regicide had been in the old. The man found guilty of 
this crime would have his eyes put out; he would be put into 
an iron cage, suspended in the air, above a public square; he 
would be completely naked; he would be attached to the bars 
of the cage by an iron belt aroundaround his waist; to the end of 
his days, he would be fed on bread and water. ‘Thus he would 
be exposed to all the rigours of the seasons, sometimes his 
head would be covered with snow, sometimes burnt by a 
scorching sun. It is in this energetic torture, presenting 
rather the extension of a painful death than that of a 
painful life, that one would truly recognize a villain 
deserving of the horror of nature in its entirety, condemned 
to see no longer the heaven that he has outraged and to live 
no longer on the earth that he has sullied’ (Vermeil, 148 - 
9). Above the punitive city hangs this iron spider; and the 
criminal who is to be thus crucified by the new law is the 
parricide. 



There is a whole new arsenal of picturesque punishments. 
‘Avoid inflicting the same punishments, ’ said Mably. The 
idea of a uniform penalty, modulated only according to the 
gravity of the crime is banished. To be more precise: the use 
of imprisonment as a general form of punishment is never 
presented in these projects for specific, visible and 
‘telling’ penalties. Imprisonment is envisaged, but as one 
among other penalties; it is the specific punishment for 
certain offences, those that infringe the liberty of 
individuals (such as abduction) or those that result from an 
abuse of liberty (disorder, violence). It is also envisaged 
as a condition to enable certain punishments to be carried 
out (forced labour, for example). But it does not cover the 
whole field of penality with its duration as the sole 
principle of variation. Or rather, the idea of penal 
imprisonment is explicitly criticized by many reformers. 
Because it is incapable of corresponding to the specificity 
of crimes. Because it has no effect on the public. Because it 
is useless, even harmful, to society: it is costly, it 
maintains convicts in idleness, it multiplies their vices 
(cf. Archives parlementaires, XXVI, 712). Because the 
execution of such a penalty is difficult to supervise and 
because there is a risk of exposing prisoners to the 
arbitrary will of their guards. Because the job of depriving 
a man of his liberty and of supervising him is an exercise of 
tyranny. ‘You are demanding that there should be monsters 
among you; and if these odious men existed, the legislator 
ought perhaps to treat them as murderers’ (Mably, 338). 
Prison as the universal penalty is incompatible with this 
whole technique of penalty-effect, penalty-representation, 
penalty-general function, penalty-sign and discourse. It is 
obscurity, violence and suspicion. ‘It is a place of 
darkness in which the citizen’ s eye cannot count the 
victims, in which consequently their number is lost as an 
example ••*. Whereas if, without multiplying crimes, one could 
multiply the example of punishments, one would succeed at 
last in rendering them less necessary; indeed, the obscurity 



of the prisons becomes a subject of defiance for the 
citizens; they easily suppose that great injustices are 
committed there ••• There is certainly something wrong when 
the law, which is made for the good of the multitude, instead 
of arousing its gratitude, continually arouses its 
discontent’ (Dufriche de Valaze, 344 - 5). 

The idea that imprisonment might as it does today cover the 
whole middle ground of punishment, between death and light 
penalties, was one that the reformers could not arrive at 
immediately. 

The problem is the following: within a short space of time, 
detention became the essential form of punishment. In the 
penal code of 1810, between death and fines, it occupies, in 
a number of forms, almost the whole field of possible 
punishments. ‘What is the system of penality accepted by the 
new law? It is incarceration in all its forms. Indeed, 
compare the four principal penalties that remain in the penal 
code. Forced labour is a form of incarceration. The convict- 
ship is an open-air prison. Detention, reclusion, 
imprisonment for a minor offence are in a sense merely 
different names for one and the same punishment’ (Remusat, 
185). And the Empire decided at once to translate this 
imprisonment, envisaged by the law, into reality, according 
to a whole penal, administrative, geographical hierarchy; at 
the lowest degree, associated with each justice of the peace, 
municipal maisons de police ; in each arrondissement, maisons 
d’ arret ; in each departement, a maison de correction ; at the 
summit, several maisons centrales for convicted criminals or 
correctionels serving sentences of over one year; lastly, in 
a few ports, convict-ships. A great prison structure was 
planned, whose different levels would correspond exactly to 
the levels of the centralized administration. The scaffold, 
where the body of the tortured criminal had been exposed to 
the ritually manifested force of the sovereign, the punitive 
theatre in which the representation of punishment was 
permanently available to the social body, was replaced by a 
great enclosed, complex and hierarchized structure that was 



integrated into the very body of the state apparatus. A quite 
different materiality, a quite different physics of power, a 
quite different way of investing men’ s bodies had emerged. 
During the Restoration and the July monarchy, there were, 
apart from a few exceptional moments, between 40,000 and 
43,000 prisoners in French gaols (approximately one prisoner 
per 600 inhabitants). The high wall, no longer the wall that 
surrounds and protects, no longer the wall that stands for 
power and wealth, but the meticulously sealed wall, 
uncrossable in either direction, closed in upon the now 
mysterious work of punishment, will become, near at hand, 
sometimes even at the very centre of the cities of the 
nineteenth century, the monotonous figure, at once material 
and symbolic, of the power to punish. Already under the 
Consulate, the Minister of the Interior had been appointed to 
investigate the different ‘places of safety’ that were 
already functioning and which could be used in different 
towns. A few years later, sums had been allocated for the 
construction, in keeping with the power that they were to 
represent and serve, of these new castles of the new civil 
order. The empire used them in fact, for another war (cf. 
Decazes). A less extravagant, but more obstinate economy 
continued to build them throughout the nineteenth century. 

In under twenty years, in any case, the principle so 
clearly formulated in the Constituent Assembly, of specific, 
appropriate, effective penalties, constituting, in each case, 
a lesson for all, became the law of detention for every 
offence of any importance, except those requiring the death 
penalty. The theatre of punishment of which the eighteenth 
century dreamed and which would have acted essentially on the 
minds of the general public was replaced by the great uniform 
machinery of the prisons, whose network of immense buildings 
was to extend across France and Europe. But twenty years is 
perhaps too long a chronology for this conjuring trick. It 
may be argued that it occurred almost instantaneously. One 
has only to look at the bill for the criminal code presented 
in the Constituent Assembly by Le Peletier. The principle 



stated at the outset is the need for ‘exact relations 
between the nature of the offence and the nature of the 
punishment’ : physical pain should be inflicted on those who 
commit crimes of violence, hard labour on the idle, shame on 
those with degraded souls. But the severe penalties actually 
proposed are three forms of detention: the ' cachot’ , in 

which the penalty of imprisonment is augmented by various 
measures (solitude, a deprivation of light, restrictions on 
food); the ‘gene’ , in which these ancillary measures are 
attenuated, and lastly imprisonment proper, which is reduced 
to simple confinement. The diversity, so solemnly promised, 
is reduced in the end to this grey, uniform penalty. Indeed, 
at the time, there were deputies who expressed surprise that, 
instead of establishing a natural relation between offences 
and penalties, a quite different plan had been adopted: ‘So 
that if I have betrayed my country, I go to prison; if I have 
killed my father, I go to prison; every imaginable offence is 
punished in the same uniform way. One might as well see a 
physician who has the same remedy for all ills’ (Chabroud, 
618). 

This prompt substitution was not confined to France. It was 
to be found, to a greater or lesser degree, in other 
countries. When Catherine II, in the years immediately 
following the treatise Des delits et des peines, gave 
instructions to the commission entrusted with the task of 
drawing up a ‘new code of laws’ , Beccaria’ s lesson on the 
specificity and variety of penalties was not forgotten; it 
was repeated almost word for word: ‘It is a triumph of civil 
liberty when the criminal laws derive each penalty from the 
particular nature of each crime. In this way all 
arbitrariness ceases; the penalty does not depend on the 
caprice of the legislator, but on the nature of the thing; it 
is not man who does violence to man, but the man’ s own 
action’ (article 67). A few years later, Beccaria’ s general 
principle served as a foundation for the new Tuscan Code and 
for the new code given by Joseph II to Austria; and yet both 
legislations made imprisonment - modulated according to its 



duration and augmented in certain cases by branding or the 
use of irons - an almost uniform penalty: at least thirty 
years’ detention for an attempt on the sovereign’ s life, 
for counterfeiting and for murder with robbery; fifteen to 
thirty years for voluntary homicide or armed robbery; one 
month to five years for simple theft, etc. - 

But if this colonization of the penalty by the prison is 
surprising, it is because imprisonment was not, as one might 
imagine, a punishment that was already securely established 
in the penal system, just below the death penalty, and which 
naturally occupied the place left vacant by the disappearance 
of public torture. In fact, imprisonment - and on this point 
many countries were in the same situation as France - had 
only a limited and marginal position in the system of 
penalties. This is shown by the texts themselves. The 
ordinance of 1670 does not include detention among the peines 
afflictives, or serious penalties. Perpetual or temporary 
imprisonment was no doubt included among certain local 
customs and practices (cf. , for example, Coquille). But 
contemporary writers maintained that it was falling into 
disuse together with other forms of torture: ‘There were 
formerly penalties that are no longer practised in France, 
such as writing a condemned man’ s penalty on his face or 
forehead and perpetual imprisonment, just as one no longer 
condemns a criminal to be exposed to wild beasts or sent down 
the mines’ (Rousseaud de la Combe, 3). In fact, it is 
certain that imprisonment had survived tenaciously as a 
punishment for less serious offences, according to local 
customs and practices. In this sense, Soulatges spoke of the 
‘light penalties’ that the ordinance of 1670 had not 
mentioned: reprimand, admonition, banishment from a certain 
place, satisfaction to the injured party and a term of 
imprisonment. In certain regions, especially those that had 
most preserved their legal peculiarities, the penalty of 
imprisonment was still widespread, but this had its 
difficulties, as in the recently annexed province of 
Roussillon. 


Yet, despite these divergencies, jurists held firmly to the 
principle that ‘imprisonment is not to be regarded as a 
penalty in our civil law’ (Serpillon, 1095 - however, one 
does find in Serpillon the idea that the rigour of 
imprisonment is the beginning of a penalty). Its role is 
rather that of holding the person and his body as security: 
ad continendos homines, non ad puniendos, as the tag has it; 
in this sense, the imprisonment of a suspect has a role 
similar to that of a debtor. Through imprisonment, one has 
security for someone, one does not punish him.- This was the 
general principle. And although imprisonment sometimes served 
as a penalty, even in important cases, it did so essentially 
as a substitute: it replaced the galleys for those - women, 
children, invalids - who could not serve there: ‘The 
sentence of imprisonment for a term or for life is equivalent 
to being sent to the galleys. ’ - In this equivalence, one 
can see clearly enough the emergence of a possible 
connection. But, for this to take place, the prison had to 
change its juridical status. 

It was also necessary to overcome a second obstacle, which, 
for France at least, was a considerable one. Imprisonment was 
especially disqualified for this role by the fact that it 
was, in practice, directly bound up with arbitrary royal 
decision and the excesses of the sovereign power. The 

( maisons de force’ , the general hospitals, the ‘king’ s 
orders’ or the orders of the police magistrates, letters 
under the king’ s private seal obtained by notables or by 
families, constituted a whole repressive practice, juxtaposed 
with ‘regular justice’ and more usually opposed to it. And 
this extra-judicial imprisonment came to be rejected by both 
classical jurists and reformers. Prisons are made by princes, 
said a traditionalist like Serpillon, who sheltered behind 
the authority of Judge Bouhier: ‘Although, for reasons of 
state, princes are sometimes inclined to inflict this 
penalty, ordinary justice makes no use of this kind of 
sentence’ (Serpillon, 1095). Detention was described by the 
reformers in innumerable statements as a figure and 


privileged instrument of despotism: ‘What is one to say of 
those secret prisons conjured up by the fatal spirit of 
monarchism, reserved in the main either for philosophers, in 
whose hands nature has placed her torch and who dared to 
enlighten their century, or for those proud independent souls 
who lack the cowardice to keep silent on the ills of their 
country; prisons whose gloomy doors are opened by mysterious 
letters and swallow up forever its unfortunate victims? What 
is to be said even of those letters, those masterpieces of 
ingenious tyranny, which overthrow the privilege of every 
citizen to be heard before he is judged, and which are a 
thousand times more dangerous for men than the invention of 
Phalaris •••’ - (Brissot, 173). 

No doubt these protests, coming from such diverse sources, 
are directed not at imprisonment as a legal penalty, but at 
the ‘illegal’ use of arbitrary, indeterminate detention. 
Nevertheless, imprisonment was seen, generally speaking, as 
branded by the abuses of power. And many cahiers de doleances 
rejected it as incompatible with good justice. Sometimes in 
the name of classical juridical principles: ‘Prisons were 
intended by the law not to punish but to secure the persons 
of the offenders •••’ (Desjardin, 477). Sometimes in the name 
of the effects of imprisonment, which punishes those who have 
not yet been convicted, which communicates and generalizes 
the evil that it ought to prevent, and which runs counter to 
the principle of the individuality of penalties by punishing 
a whole family; it was said that ‘imprisonment is not a 
penalty. Humanity rises up against the frightful thought that 
it is not a punishment to deprive a citizen of his most 
precious possession, to plunge him ignominiously into the den 
of crime, to snatch him from everything that is dear to him, 
to bring him perhaps to ruin and to deprive not only him but 
his unfortunate family of all means of subsistence’ 

(Desjardin, 483). And, on several occasions, the cahiers 
demanded the abolition of those ‘houses of internment’ : 

‘We believe that the maisons de force must be razed to the 
ground •••’ - And the decree of 13 March 1790 ordered the 


freeing of ‘all persons detained in castles, religious 
houses, maisons de force, maisons de police or any other 
prisons, by orders under the king’ s private seal or by 
orders of the agents of the executive power’ . 

How then could detention, so evidently bound up with an 
illegality that was denounced even in the power of the 
prince, become in so short a time one of the most general 
forms of legal punishment? 

The explanation most usually given is the formation, during 
the classical age, of a number of great models of punitive 
imprisonment. Their prestige, which was all the greater in 
that the most recent examples came from England and above all 
from America, appears to have made it possible to overcome 
the double obstacle constituted by the age-old rules of law 
and the despotic functioning of imprisonment. Very soon, it 
seems, these obstacles were swept away by the punitive 
marvels thought up by the reformers, and detention became a 
serious reality. There can be no doubt about the importance 
of these models. But it is precisely these models that, 
before providing a solution, themselves pose problems: the 
problem of their existence and the problem of their 
diffusion. How were they able to come into being and, above 
all, how did they become so generally accepted? For it is 
easy to show that, although they correspond on a number of 
points with the general principles of penal reform, they fail 
to do so on an even greater number; sometimes they are even 
quite incompatible. 

The oldest of these models, the one that is generally 
regarded as having more or less inspired all the others, was 
the Rasphuis of Amsterdam, opened in 1596.- Originally, it 
was intended for beggars or young malefactors. Its 
functioning obeyed three great principles: the duration of 
the penalties could, at least within certain limits, be 
determined by the administration itself, according to the 
prisoner’ s conduct (indeed this latitude could be given in 
the sentence itself: in 1597 a prisoner was condemned to 


twelve years’ imprisonment, which could be reduced to eight, 
if his behaviour proved satisfactory). Work was obligatory; 
it was performed in common (indeed the individual cell was 
used only as an additional punishment; prisoners slept two or 
three to a bed, in cells containing between four and twelve 
persons); and, for the work done, the prisoners received 
wages. A strict time-table, a system of prohibitions and 
obligations, continual supervision, exhortations, religious 
readings, a whole complex of methods ‘to draw towards good’ 
and ‘to turn away from evil’ held the prisoners in its grip 
from day to day. One may take the Rasphuis of Amsterdam as a 
basic figure. Historically, it forms the link between the 
theory, so characteristic of the sixteenth century, of a 
pedagogical and spiritual transformation of individuals 
brought about by continuous exercise, and the penitentiary 
techniques conceived in the second half of the eighteenth 
century. And it provided the three institutions that were 
then set up with the fundamental principles that each was to 
develop in its own particular direction. 

The maison de force at Ghent organized penal labour above 
all around economic imperatives. The reason given was that 
idleness was the general cause of most crimes. An 
investigation - no doubt one of the first - carried out 
among those sentenced under the jurisdiction of Alost, in 
1749, showed that malefactors were not ‘artisans or 
labourers’ (workers think only of the work that feeds them), 
but ‘idlers given up to begging’ . - Hence the idea of a 
house that would in a sense provide a universal pedagogy of 
work for those who had proved to be resistant to it. This had 
four advantages: it reduced the number of criminal 
prosecutions, which were costly to the state (it was 
estimated that this would save over 100,000 pounds in 
Flanders); this would make it unnecessary to return money 
paid in taxes to the owners of woods ruined by vagabonds; it 
would create a mass of new workers, which would help ‘by 
competition to bring down the cost of labour’ ; lastly, it 
would enable the true poor to benefit, to the full, from 


necessary charity (Vilan, 68). This useful pedagogy would 
revive for the lazy individual a liking for work, force him 
back into a system of interests in which labour would be more 
advantageous than laziness, form around him a small, 
miniature, simplified, coercive society in which the maxim, 

‘he who wants to live must work’ , would be clearly 
revealed. Work would be compulsory, but so too would be 
remuneration, which enables the prisoner to improve his lot 
during and after detention. ‘The man who does not find his 
subsistence must be made to desire to procure it for himself 
by work; he is offered it by supervision and discipline; in a 
sense, he is forced to acquire it; he is then tempted by the 
bait of gain; corrected in his morals, accustomed to work, 
his anxiety aroused by the little money he has kept for his 
release, ’ he has learned a trade ‘that will guarantee a 
subsistence without danger’ (Vilan, 107). This 
reconstruction of homo oeconomicus excluded the use of 
penalties that were too short - this would prevent the 
acquisition of habits and skills of work - or too long - 
which would make any apprenticeship useless. ‘The term of 
six months is too short to correct criminals, and to bring 
them to the spirit of work’ ; on the other hand, ‘a life 
sentence throws them into despair; they become indifferent to 
the correction of their morals and to the spirit of work; 
they become concerned only with plans to escape and to rebel; 
and since the judgements that were passed on them did not 
deprive them of life, why should one seek to render it 
unbearable for them?’ (Vilan, 102-3). The duration of the 
penalty has meaning only in relation to possible correction, 
and to an economic use of the corrected criminal. 

To the principle of work, the English models added, as an 
essential addition to correction, isolation. The outlines had 
been provided in 1775, by Hanway, who justified it first with 
negative reasons: promiscuity in the prison provided bad 
examples and possibilities of escape in the short term and of 
blackmail or complicity in the long term. The prison would be 
too much like a factory if one left the prisoners to work 



together. The positive reasons followed: isolation provides a 
‘terrible shock’ which, while protecting the prisoner from 
bad influences, enables him to go into himself and rediscover 
in the depths of his conscience the voice of good; solitary 
work would then become not only an apprenticeship, but also 
an exercise in spiritual conversion; it would rearrange not 
only the complex of interests proper to homo oeconomicus, but 
also the imperatives of the moral subject. The cell, that 
technique of Christian monachism, which had survived only in 
Catholic countries, becomes in this protestant society the 
instrument by which one may reconstitute both homo 
oeconomicus and the religious conscience. Between the crime 
and the return to right and virtue, the prison would 
constitute the ‘space between two worlds’ the place for the 
individual transformation that would restore to the state the 
subject it had lost. Hanway called this apparatus for 
modifying individuals a ‘reformatory’ (cf. Hanway). These 
were the general principles that Howard and Blackstone put 
into operation in 1779 when the independence of the United 
States put an end to deportation and when a law was being 
drawn up to modify the system of penalties. Imprisonment, 
with the purpose of transforming the soul and conduct, made 
its entry into the system of civil laws. The preamble of the 
bill, written by Blackstone and Howard, describes individual 
imprisonment in terms of its triple function as example to be 
feared, instrument of conversion and condition for an 
apprenticeship: subjected ‘to isolated detention, regular 
work and the influence of religious instruction’ , certain 
criminals might not only inspire terror in those who would be 
tempted to imitate them, ‘but also to correct themselves and 
to acquire the habit of work’ (Preamble of the bill of 
1779). Hence the decision to build two penitentiaries, one 
for men, one for women, in which the isolated prisoners would 
be put ‘to the most servile labours, most compatible with 
the ignorance, negligence and obstinacy of the criminals’ : 
walking in a wheel to move a machine, fixing a winch, 
polishing marble, beating hemp, rasping logwood, cutting up 



rags, rope-making and sewing sacks. In fact, only one 
penitentiary was built, at Gloucester, and it corresponded 
only partially to the initial plan: total confinement for the 
most dangerous criminals; for the others, day work in common 
and separation at night. 

Then came the Philadelphia model. This was no doubt the 
most famous because it was associated in people’ s minds with 
the political innovations of the American system and also 
because it was not, like the others, doomed to immediate 
failure and abandonment; it was continuously re-examined and 
transformed right up to the great debates of the 1830s on 
penitentiary reform. In many respects the Walnut Street 
Prison, opened in 1790, under the direct influence of the 
Quakers, was modelled on those of Ghent and Gloucester.— 
There was compulsory work in workshops; the prisoners were 
kept constantly occupied; the prison was financed by this 
work, but the prisoners were also rewarded individually as a 
way of reinserting them morally and materially into the 
strict world of the economy; by keeping the prisoners 
‘constantly employed on productive works, they were able to 
defray the expenses of the prison, they were not left idle 
and they were able to save a little money for the time when 
their captivity would cease’ (La Rochefoucauld-Liancourt, 

9). Life was partitioned, therefore, according to an 
absolutely strict time-table, under constant supervision; 
each moment of the day was devoted to a particular type of 
activity, and brought with it its own obligations and 
prohibitions: ‘All prisoners rise at daybreak, so that, 

after making their beds, cleaning and washing themselves and 
attending to other needs, they generally begin their work at 
sunrise. From that moment, no one may go into the rooms or 
other places except to the workshops and places assigned for 
their work ••*. At nightfall, a bell rings to mark the end of 
their work ••• They are given half an hour to arrange their 
beds, after which they are not allowed to converse aloud or 
to make the least noise’ (Turnbull, 15-16). As at 
Gloucester, solitary confinement was not total; it was used 


for certain prisoners who would in former times have incurred 
the death penalty, and for those inside the prison who 
deserved special punishment: ‘There, without occupation, 
without anything to distract him, waiting in uncertainty for 
the moment when he would be delivered’ , the prisoner spent 
‘long anxious hours, with nothing but the reflections that 
are present to the minds of all guilty persons’ (Teeters, 
1935, 49). Lastly, as at Ghent, the length of the 
imprisonment could vary with the behaviour of the prisoner: 
after consulting the files, the prison inspectors obtained 
from the authorities - without much difficulty up to the 
1820s - pardons for prisoners who had shown good behaviour. 

Furthermore, Walnut Street had a number of characteristics 
that were specific to it, or which at least developed what 
was potentially present in the other models. First, the 
principle of not publicizing the penalty. Though the sentence 
and the reasons for it should be known to all, the penalty 
should be carried out in secret; the public was to intervene 
neither as a witness, nor as a guarantor of punishment; the 
certainty that, behind the walls, the prisoner was serving 
his sentence must suffice as an example: there were to be no 
more of those street spectacles which the law of 1786 has 
given rise to by imposing on certain prisoners public works 
to be carried out in towns and on the highways. — The 
punishment and correction that it must operate are processes 
that unfold between the prisoner and those who supervise him. 
They are processes that effect a transformation of the 
individual as a whole - of his body and of his habits by the 
daily work that he is forced to perform, of his mind and his 
will by the spiritual attentions that are paid to him: 

‘Bibles and other books of religious practice are provided; 
the clergy of the different obediences to be found in the 
town and suburbs perform the services once a week and any 
other edifying person may have access to the prisoners at any 
time’ (Teeters, 1935, 53 - 4). But this transformation is 
entrusted to the administration itself. Solitude and self- 
examination are not enough; nor are purely religious 


exhortations. Work on the prisoner 7 s soul must be carried 
out as often as possible. The prison, though an 
administrative apparatus, will at the same time be a machine 
for altering minds. On first entering the prison, the 
prisoner will be read the regulations; ‘at the same time, 
the inspectors seek to strengthen in him the moral 
obligations that he now has; they represent to him the 
offence that he has committed with regard to them, the evil 
that has consequently resulted for the society that protected 
him and the need to make compensation by his example and his 
amendment. They then make him promise to do his duty gladly, 
to behave decently, promising him or allowing him to hope 
that, before the expiration of the term of the sentence, he 
will be able to obtain his discharge if he behaves well ••• 
From time to time the inspectors make it their duty to 
converse with the criminals one after the other, concerning 
their duties as men and as members of society 7 (Turnbull, 

27). 

But no doubt the most important thing was that this control 
and transformation of behaviour were accompanied - both as a 
condition and as a consequence - by the development of a 
knowledge of the individuals. When the new prisoner arrived, 
the Walnut Street administration received a report concerning 
his crime, the circumstances in which it was committed, a 
summary of the examinations of the defendant, notes on his 
behaviour before and after sentence: indispensable elements 
if one wished to ‘decide what steps will have to be taken to 
destroy his old habits’ . — And throughout his detention he 
would be observed; his conduct would be noted daily and the 
inspectors - twelve local worthies appointed in 1795 - who, 
two by two, visited the prison each week, would be kept 
informed of events, follow the conduct of each prisoner and 
decide which of them deserved a shortening of his term. This 
ever-growing knowledge of the individuals made it possible to 
divide them up in the prison not so much according to their 
crimes as according to the dispositions that they revealed. 
The prison became a sort of permanent observatory that made 


it possible to distribute the varieties of vice or weakness. 
From 1797, the prisoners were divided into four classes: the 
first for those who were explicitly condemned to solitary 
confinement or who had committed serious offences in the 
prison; the second for those who were ‘well known as old 
offenders ••• whose depraved morality, dangerous character, 
irregular dispositions, or disorderly conduct’ became 
apparent during the time they were in prison; the third for 
those ‘whose character and circumstances, before and after 
conviction, led one to believe that they were not habitual 
offenders’ ; the fourth and last was a special section, a 
probationary class for those whose character was still not 
known, or who, if they were better known, did not deserve to 
be put in the preceding category (Teeters, 1935, 59). A whole 
corpus of individualizing knowledge was being organized that 
took as its field of reference not so much the crime 
committed (at least in isolation), but the potentiality of 
danger that lies hidden in an individual and which is 
manifested in his observed everyday conduct. The prison 
functions in this as an apparatus of knowledge. 

Between this apparatus of punishment proposed by the 
Flemish, English and American models, between these 
‘reformatories’ and all the punishments imagined by the 
reformers, one may establish the points of convergence and 
the disparities. 

Points of convergence. In the first instance, there is a 
difference in the temporal direction of punishment. The 
‘reformatories’ were mechanisms directed towards the 
future; they too were intended not to efface a crime, but to 
prevent its repetition. ‘As to the end, or final cause of 
human punishments. This is not by way of atonement or 
expiation for the crime committed; for that must be left to 
the just determination of the supreme being •••’ (Blackstone, 
11). And in Pennsylvania, Buxton declared, the principles of 
Montesquieu and Beccaria should now have the ‘force of 
axioms’ , that ‘the prevention of crimes is the sole end of 



punishment’ (Bradford, 3). So one punishes not to efface the 
crime, but to transform a criminal (actual or potential); 
punishment must bring with it a certain corrective technique. 
Here, too, Rush is close to the reforming jurists - were it 
not, perhaps, for the metaphor he uses when he says: we have 
invented machines that facilitate labour; how much more one 
should praise the inventor of ‘the most speedy and effectual 
methods of restoring the vicious part of mankind to virtue 
and happiness, and of extirpating a portion of vice from the 
world’ . — Lastly, the English and the American models, like 
the projects of the legislators and theoreticians, require 
methods to individualize the penalty: in its duration, its 
nature, its intensity, the way in which it is carried out, 
the punishment must be adjusted to the individual character 
and to the danger that he bears within him for others. The 
system of penalties must be open to individual variables. In 
their general outline, the models more or less inspired by 
the Rasphuis of Amsterdam were not in contradiction with the 
proposals of the reformers. It might even be thought at first 
glance that they were merely a development of them - or a 
sketch - at the level of concrete institutions. 

Yet the disparity emerges clearly enough when one defines 
the techniques of this individualizing correction. The 
difference is to be found in the procedure of access to the 
individual, the way in which the punishing power gets control 
over him, the instruments that it uses in order to achieve 
this transformation; it is in the technology of the penalty, 
not in its theoretical foundation; in the relation that it 
establishes with the body and with the soul, and not in the 
way that it is inserted within the legal system. 

That was the method of the reformers. Where exactly did the 
penalty apply its pressure, gain control of the individual? 
Representations: the representations of his interests, the 
representation of his advantages and disadvantages, pleasure 
and displeasure; and, if the punishment happens to seize the 
body, to apply techniques to it that are little short of 
torture, it is because it is - for the condemned man and for 


the spectators - an object of representation. By what 
instrument did one act on the representations? Other 
representations, or rather couplings of ideas (crime- 
punishment, the imagined advantage of crime-disadvantage 
perceived in the punishments); these pairings could function 
only in the element of publicity: punitive scenes that 
established them or reinforced them in the eyes of all, a 
discourse that circulated, brought back into currency at each 
moment the complex of signs. The role of the criminal in 
punishment was to reintroduce, in the face of crime and the 
criminal code, the real presence of the signified - that is 
to say, of the penalty which, according to the terms of the 
code, must be infallibly associated with the offence. By 
producing this signified abundantly and visibly, and 
therefore reactivating the signifying system of the code, the 
idea of crime functioning as a sign of punishment, it is with 
this coin that the offender pays his debt to society. 
Individual correction must, therefore, assure the process of 
redefining the individual as subject of law, through the 
reinforcement of the systems of signs and representations 
that they circulate. 

The apparatus of corrective penality acts in a quite 
different way. The point of application of the penalty is not 
the representation, but the body, time, everyday gestures and 
activities; the soul, too, but in so far as it is the seat of 
habits. The body and the soul, as principles of behaviour, 
form the element that is now proposed for punitive 
intervention. Rather than on an art of representations, this 
punitive intervention must rest on a studied manipulation of 
the individual: ‘I have no more doubt of every crime having 
its cure in moral and physical influence •••’ ; so, in order 
to decide on punishments, one ‘will require some knowledge 
of the principles of sensation, and of the sympathies which 
occur in the nervous system’ (Rush, 13). As for the 
instruments used, these are no longer complexes of 
representation, reinforced and circulated, but forms of 
coercion, schemata of constraint, applied and repeated. 



Exercises, not signs: time-tables, compulsory movements, 
regular activities, solitary meditation, work in common, 
silence, application, respect, good habits. And, ultimately, 
what one is trying to restore in this technique of correction 
is not so much the juridical subject, who is caught up in the 
fundamental interests of the social pact, but the obedient 
subject, the individual subjected to habits, rules, orders, 
an authority that is exercised continually around him and 
upon him, and which he must allow to function automatically 
in him. There are two quite distinct ways, therefore, of 
reacting to the offence: one may restore the juridical 
subject of the social pact, or shape an obedient subject, 
according to the general and detailed form of some power. 

All this would no doubt amount to little more than a 
speculative difference - for in each case it is a question 
of forming obedient individuals - if the penality of 
‘coercion’ did not bring with it certain crucial 
consequences. The training of behaviour by a full time-table, 
the acquisition of habits, the constraints of the body imply 
a very special relation between the individual who is 
punished and the individual who punishes him. It is a 
relation that not only renders the dimension of the spectacle 
useless: it excludes it. — The agent of punishment must 
exercise a total power, which no third party can disturb; the 
individual to be corrected must be entirely enveloped in the 
power that is being exercised over him. Secrecy is 
imperative, and so too is autonomy, at least in relation to 
this technique of punishment: it must have its own 
functioning, its own rules, its own techniques, its own 
knowledge; it must fix its own norms, decide its own results. 
There is a discontinuity, or in any case a specificity, in 
relation to the legal power that declares guilt and fixes the 
general limits of punishment. These two consequences - 
secrecy and autonomy in the exercise of the power to punish 
- are unacceptable for a theory and a policy of penality 
that has two aims in view: to get all citizens to participate 
in the punishment of the social enemy and to render the 


exercise of the power to punish entirely adequate and 
transparent to the laws that publicly define it. Secret 
punishments and punishments not specified in the legal code, 
a power to punish exercised in the shadows according to 
criteria and with instruments that elude control - this was 
enough to compromise the whole strategy of the reform. After 
the sentence, a power was constituted that was reminiscent of 
the power exercised in the old system. The power that applied 
the penalties now threatened to be as arbitrary, as despotic, 
as the power that once decided them. 

In short, the divergence is the following: punitive city or 
coercive institution? On the one hand, a functioning of penal 
power, distributed throughout the social space; present 
everywhere as scene, spectacle, sign, discourse; legible like 
an open book; operating by a permanent recodification of the 
mind of the citizens; eliminating crime by those obstacles 
placed before the idea of crime; acting invisibly and 
uselessly on the ‘soft fibres of the brain’ , as Servan put 
it. A power to punish that ran the whole length of the social 
network would act at each of its points, and in the end would 
no longer be perceived as a power of certain individuals over 
others, but as an immediate reaction of all in relation to 
the individual. On the other hand, a compact functioning of 
the power to punish: a meticulous assumption of 
responsibility for the body and the time of the convict, a 
regulation of his movements and behaviour by a system of 
authority and knowledge; a concerted orthopaedy applied to 
convicts in order to reclaim them individually; an autonomous 
administration of this power that is isolated both from the 
social body and from the judicial power in the strict sense. 
The emergence of the prison marks the institutionalization of 
the power to punish, or, to be more precise: will the power 
to punish (with the strategic aim adopted in the late 
eighteenth century, the reduction of popular illegality) be 
better served by concealing itself beneath a general social 
function, in the ‘punitive city’ , or by investing itself in 



a coercive institution, in the enclosed space of the 
‘reformatory’ ? 

In any case, it can be said that, in the late eighteenth 
century, one is confronted by three ways of organizing the 
power to punish. The first is the one that was still 
functioning and which was based on the old monarchical law. 
The other two both refer to a preventive, utilitarian, 
corrective conception of a right to punish that belongs to 
society as a whole; but they are very different from one 
another at the level of the mechanisms they envisage. Broadly 
speaking, one might say that, in monarchical law, punishment 
is a ceremonial of sovereignty; it uses the ritual marks of 
the vengeance that it applies to the body of the condemned 
man; and it deploys before the eyes of the spectators an 
effect of terror as intense as it is discontinuous, irregular 
and always above its own laws, the physical presence of the 
sovereign and of his power. The reforming jurists, on the 
other hand, saw punishment as a procedure for requalifying 
individuals as subjects, as juridical subjects; it uses not 
marks, but signs, coded sets of representations, which would 
be given the most rapid circulation and the most general 
acceptance possible by citizens witnessing the scene of 
punishment. Lastly, in the project for a prison institution 
that was then developing, punishment was seen as a technique 
for the coercion of individuals; it operated methods of 
training the body - not signs - by the traces it leaves, in 
the form of habits, in behaviour; and it presupposed the 
setting up of a specific power for the administration of the 
penalty. We have, then, the sovereign and his force, the 
social body and the administrative apparatus; mark, sign, 
trace; ceremony, representation, exercise; the vanquished 
enemy, the juridical subject in the process of 
requalification, the individual subjected to immediate 
coercion; the tortured body, the soul with its manipulated 
representations, the body subjected to training. We have here 
the three series of elements that characterize the three 
mechanisms that face one another in the second half of the 



eighteenth century. They cannot be reduced to theories of law 
(though they overlap with such theories), nor can they be 
identified with apparatuses or institutions (though they are 
based on them), nor can they be derived from moral choices 
(though they find their justification in morality). They are 
modalities according to which the power to punish is 
exercised: three technologies of power. 

The problem, then, is the following: how is it that, in the 
end, it was the third that was adopted? How did the coercive, 
corporal, solitary, secret model of the power to punish 
replace the representative, scenic, signifying, public, 
collective model? Why did the physical exercise of punishment 
(which is not torture) replace, with the prison that is its 
institutional support, the social play of the signs of 
punishment and the prolix festival that circulated them? 




Part Three 


DISCIPLINE 



1. Docile bodies 


Let us take the ideal figure of the soldier as it was still 
seen in the early seventeenth century. To begin with, the 
soldier was someone who could be recognized from afar; he 
bore certain signs: the natural signs of his strength and his 
courage, the marks, too, of his pride; his body was the 
blazon of his strength and valour; and although it is true 
that he had to learn the profession of arms little by little 
- generally in actual fighting - movements like marching 
and attitudes like the bearing of the head belonged for the 
most part to a bodily rhetoric of honour; ‘The signs for 
recognizing those most suited to this profession are a 
lively, alert manner, an erect head, a taut stomach, broad 
shoulders, long arms, strong fingers, a small belly, thick 
thighs, slender legs and dry feet, because a man of such a 
figure could not fail to be agile and strong’ ; when he 
becomes a pike-bearer, the soldier ‘will have to march in 
step in order to have as much grace and gravity as possible, 
for the pike is an honourable weapon, worthy to be borne with 
gravity and boldness’ (Montgommery, 6 and 7). By the late 
eighteenth century, the soldier has become something that can 
be made; out of a formless clay, an inapt body, the machine 
required can be constructed; posture is gradually corrected; 
a calculated constraint runs slowly through each part of the 
body, mastering it, making it pliable, ready at all times, 
turning silently into the automatism of habit; in short, one 
has ‘got rid of the peasant’ and given him ‘the air of a 
soldier’ (ordinance of 20 March 1764). Recruits become 
accustomed to ‘holding their heads high and erect; to 



standing upright, without bending the back, to sticking out 
the belly, throwing out the chest and throwing back the 
shoulders; and, to help them acquire the habit, they are 
given this position while standing against a wall in such a 
way that the heels, the thighs, the waist and the shoulders 
touch it, as also do the backs of the hands, as one turns the 
arms outwards, without moving them away from the body ••• 
Likewise, they will be taught never to fix their eyes on the 
ground, but to look straight at those they pass ••• to remain 
motionless until the order is given, without moving the head, 
the hands or the feet ••• lastly to march with a bold step, 
with knee and ham taut, on the points of the feet, which 
should face outwards’ (ordinance of 20 March 1764). 

The classical age discovered the body as object and target 
of power. It is easy enough to find signs of the attention 
then paid to the body - to the body that is manipulated, 
shaped, trained, which obeys, responds, becomes skilful and 
increases its forces. The great book of Man-theHMachine was 
written simultaneously on two registers: the anatomico- 
metaphysical register, of which Descartes wrote the first 
pages and which the physicians and philosophers continued, 
and the technico-political register, which was constituted by 
a whole set of regulations and by empirical and calculated 
methods relating to the army, the school and the hospital, 
for controlling or correcting the operations of the body. 
These two registers are quite distinct, since it was a 
question, on the one hand, of submission and use and, on the 
other, of functioning and explanation: there was a useful 
body and an intelligible body. And yet there are points of 
overlap from one to the other. La Mettrie’ s L’ Homme-machine 
is both a materialist reduction of the soul and a general 
theory of dressage, at the centre of which reigns the notion 
of ‘docility’ , which joins the analysable body to the 
manipulable body. A body is docile that may be subjected, 
used, transformed and improved. The celebrated automata, on 
the other hand, were not only a way of illustrating an 
organism, they were also political puppets, small-scale
models of power: Frederick II, the meticulous king of small 
machines, well-trained regiments and long exercises, was 
obsessed with them. 

What was so new in these projects of docility that 
interested the eighteenth century so much? It was certainly 
not the first time that the body had become the object of 
such imperious and pressing investments; in every society, 
the body was in the grip of very strict powers, which imposed 
on it constraints, prohibitions or obligations. However, 
there were several new things in these techniques. To begin 
with, there was the scale of the control: it was a question 
not of treating the body, en masse, ‘wholesale’ , as if it 
were an indissociable unity, but of working it ‘retail’ , 
individually; of exercising upon it a subtle coercion, of 
obtaining holds upon it at the level of the mechanism itself 
- movements, gestures, attitudes, rapidity: an infinitesimal 
power over the active body. Then there was the object of the 
control: it was not or was no longer the signifying elements 
of behaviour or the language of the body, but the economy, 
the efficiency of movements, their internal organization; 
constraint bears upon the forces rather than upon the signs; 
the only truly important ceremony is that of exercise. 

Lastly, there is the modality: it implies an uninterrupted, 
constant coercion, supervising the processes of the activity 
rather than its result and it is exercised according to a 
codification that partitions as closely as possible time, 
space, movement. These methods, which made possible the 
meticulous control of the operations of the body, which 
assured the constant subjection of its forces and imposed 
upon them a relation of docility-utility, might be called 
‘disciplines’ . Many disciplinary methods had long been in 
existence - in monasteries, armies, workshops. But in the 
course of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the 
disciplines became general formulas of domination. They were 
different from slavery because they were not based on a 
relation of appropriation of bodies; indeed, the elegance of 
the discipline lay in the fact that it could dispense with 



this costly and violent relation by obtaining effects of 
utility at least as great. They were different, too, from 
‘service’ , which was a constant, total, massive, non- 
analytical, unlimited relation of domination, established in 
the form of the individual will of the master, his 
‘caprice’ . They were different from vassalage, which was a 
highly coded, but distant relation of submission, which bore 
less on the operations of the body than on the products of 
labour and the ritual marks of allegiance. Again, they were 
different from asceticism and from ‘disciplines’ of a 
monastic type, whose function was to obtain renunciations 
rather than increases of utility and which, although they 
involved obedience to others, had as their principal aim an 
increase of the mastery of each individual over his own body. 
The historical moment of the disciplines was the moment when 
an art of the human body was born, which was directed not 
only at the growth of its skills, nor at the intensification 
of its subjection, but at the formation of a relation that in 
the mechanism itself makes it more obedient as it becomes 
more useful, and conversely. What was then being formed was a 
policy of coercions that act upon the body, a calculated 
manipulation of its elements, its gestures, its behaviour. 

The human body was entering a machinery of power that 
explores it, breaks it down and rearranges it. A ‘political 
anatomy’ , which was also a ‘mechanics of power’ , was being 
born; it defined how one may have a hold over others’ 
bodies, not only so that they may do what one wishes, but so 
that they may operate as one wishes, with the techniques, the 
speed and the efficiency that one determines. Thus discipline 
produces subjected and practised bodies, ‘docile’ bodies. 
Discipline increases the forces of the body (in economic 
terms of utility) and diminishes these same forces (in 
political terms of obedience). In short, it dissociates power 
from the body; on the one hand, it turns it into an 
‘aptitude’ , a ‘capacity’ , which it seeks to increase; on 
the other hand, it reverses the course of the energy, the 
power that might result from it, and turns it into a relation 



of strict subjection. If economic exploitation separates the 
force and the product of labour, let us say that disciplinary 
coercion establishes in the body the constricting link 
between an increased aptitude and an increased domination. 

The ‘invention’ of this new political anatomy must not be 
seen as a sudden discovery. It is rather a multiplicity of 
often minor processes, of different origin and scattered 
location, which overlap, repeat, or imitate one another, 
support one another, distinguish themselves from one another 
according to their domain of application, converge and 
gradually produce the blueprint of a general method. They 
were at work in secondary education at a very early date, 
later in primary schools; they slowly invested the space of 
the hospital; and, in a few decades, they restructured the 
military organization. They sometimes circulated very rapidly 
from one point to another (between the army and the technical 
schools or secondary schools), sometimes slowly and 
discreetly (the insidious militarization of the large 
workshops). On almost every occasion, they were adopted in 
response to particular needs: an industrial innovation, a 
renewed outbreak of certain epidemic diseases, the invention 
of the rifle or the victories of Prussia. This did not 
prevent them being totally inscribed in general and essential 
transformations, which we must now try to delineate. 

There can be no question here of writing the history of the 
different disciplinary institutions, with all their 
individual differences. I simply intend to map on a series of 
examples some of the essential techniques that most easily 
spread from one to another. These were always meticulous, 
often minute, techniques, but they had their importance: 
because they defined a certain mode of detailed political 
investment of the body, a ‘new micro-physics’ of power; and 
because, since the seventeenth century, they had constantly 
reached out to ever broader domains, as if they tended to 
cover the entire social body. Small acts of cunning endowed 
with a great power of diffusion, subtle arrangements, 
apparently innocent, but profoundly suspicious, mechanisms 



that obeyed economies too shameful to be acknowledged, or 
pursued petty forms of coercion - it was nevertheless they 
that brought about the mutation of the punitive system, at 
the threshold of the contemporary period. Describing them 
will require great attention to detail: beneath every set of 
figures, we must seek not a meaning, but a precaution; we 
must situate them not only in the inextricability of a 
functioning, but in the coherence of a tactic. They are the 
acts of cunning, not so much of the greater reason that works 
even in its sleep and gives meaning to the insignificant, as 
of the attentive ‘malevolence’ that turns everything to 
account. Discipline is a political anatomy of detail. 

Before we lose patience we would do well to recall the 
words of Marshal de Saxe: ‘Although those who concern 
themselves with details are regarded as folk of limited 
intelligence, it seems to me that this part is essential, 
because it is the foundation, and it is impossible to erect 
any building or establish any method without understanding 
its principles. It is not enough to have a liking for 
architecture. One must also know stone-cutting’ (Saxe, 5). 
There is a whole history to be written about such ‘stone¬ 
cutting’ - a history of the utilitarian rationalization of 
detail in moral accountability and political control. The 
classical age did not initiate it; rather it accelerated it, 
changed its scale, gave it precise instruments, and perhaps 
found some echoes for it in the calculation of the infinitely 
small or in the description of the most detailed 
characteristics of natural beings. In any case, ‘detail’ 
had long been a category of theology and asceticism: every 
detail is important since, in the sight of God, no immensity 
is greater than a detail, nor is anything so small that it 
was not willed by one of his individual wishes. In this great 
tradition of the eminence of detail, all the minutiae of 
Christian education, of scholastic or military pedagogy, all 
forms of ‘training’ found their place easily enough. For 
the disciplined man, as for the true believer, no detail is 
unimportant, but not so much for the meaning that it conceals 



within it as for the hold it provides for the power that 
wishes to seize it. Characteristic is the great hymn to the 
‘little things’ and to their eternal importance, sung by 
Jean-Baptiste de La Salle, in his Traite sur les obligations 
des freres des Ecoles chretiennes. The mystique of the 
everyday is joined here with the discipline of the minute. 

‘How dangerous it is to neglect little things. It is a very 
consoling reflection for a soul like mine, little disposed to 
great actions, to think that fidelity to little things may, 
by an imperceptible progress, raise us to the most eminent 
sanctity: because little things lead to greater ••• Little 
things; it will be said, alas, my God, what can we do that is 
great for you, weak and mortal creatures that we are. Little 
things; if great things presented themselves would we perform 
them? Would we not think them beyond our strength? Little 
things; and if God accepts them and wishes to receive them as 
great things? Little things; has one ever felt this? Does one 
judge according to experience? Little things; one is 
certainly guilty, therefore, if seeing them as such, one 
refuses them? Little things; yet it is they that in the end 
have made great saints! Yes, little things; but great 
motives, great feelings, great fervour, great ardour, and 
consequently great merits, great treasures, great rewards’ 

(La Salle, Traite ••*, 238 - 9). The meticulousness of the 
regulations, the fussiness of the inspections, the 
supervision of the smallest fragment of life and of the body 
will soon provide, in the context of the school, the 
barracks, the hospital or the workshop, a laicized content, 
an economic or technical rationality for this mystical 
calculus of the infinitesimal and the infinite. And a History 
of Detail in the eighteenth century, presided over by Jean- 
Baptiste de La Salle, touching on Leibniz and Buffon, via 
Frederick II, covering pedagogy, medicine, military tactics 
and economics, should bring us, at the end of the century, to 
the man who dreamt of being another Newton, not the Newton of 
the immensities of the heavens and the planetary masses, but 
a Newton of ‘small bodies’ , small movements, small actions; 



to the man who replied to Monge’ s remark, ‘there was only 
one world to discover’ : ‘What do I hear? But the world of 
details, who has never dreamt of that other world, what of 
that world? I have believed in it ever since I was fifteen. I 
was concerned with it then, and this memory lives within me, 
as an obsession never to be abandoned ••• That other world is 
the most important of all that I flatter myself I have 
discovered: when I think of it, my heart aches’ (these words 
are attributed to Bonaparte in the Introduction to Saint- 
Hilaire’ s Notions synthetiques et historiques de philosophie 
naturelle). Napoleon did not discover this world; but we know 
that he set out to organize it; and he wished to arrange 
around him a mechanism of power that would enable him to see 
the smallest event that occurred in the state he governed; he 
intended, by means of the rigorous discipline that he 
imposed, ‘to embrace the whole of this vast machine without 
the slightest detail escaping his attention’ (Treilhard, 

14). 

A meticulous observation of detail, and at the same time a 
political awareness of these small things, for the control 
and use of men, emerge through the classical age bearing with 
them a whole set of techniques, a whole corpus of methods and 
knowledge, descriptions, plans and data. And from such 
trifles, no doubt, the man of modern humanism was born. - 

The art of distributions 

In the first instance, discipline proceeds from the 
distribution of individuals in space. To achieve this end, it 
employs several techniques. 

1. Discipline sometimes requires enclosure, the 
specification of a place heterogeneous to all others and 
closed in upon itself. It is the protected place of 
disciplinary monotony. There was the great ‘confinement’ of 
vagabonds and paupers; there were other more discreet, but 
insidious and effective ones. There were the colleges, or 
secondary schools: the monastic model was gradually imposed; 


boarding appeared as the most perfect, if not the most 
frequent, educational regime; it became obligatory at Louis- 
le-Grand when, after the departure of the Jesuits, it was 
turned into a model school (cf. Aries, 308 - 13 and Snyders, 
35-41). There were the military barracks: the army, that 
vagabond mass, has to be held in place; looting and violence 
must be prevented; the fears of local inhabitants, who do not 
care for troops passing through their towns, must be calmed; 
conflicts with the civil authorities must be avoided; 
desertion must be stopped, expenditure controlled. The 
ordinance of 1719 envisaged the construction of several 
hundred barracks, on the model of those already set up in the 
south of the country; there would be strict confinements: 

‘The whole will be enclosed by an outer wall ten feet high, 
which will surround the said houses, at a distance of thirty 
feet from all the sides’ ; this will have the effect of 
maintaining the troops in ‘order and discipline, so that an 
officer will be in a position to answer for them’ 

(Z' Ordonnance militaire, IXL, 25 September 1719). In 1745, 
there were barracks in about 320 towns; and it was estimated 
that the total capacity of the barracks in 1775 was 
approximately 200,000 men (Daisy, 201-9; an anonymous memoir 
of 1775, in Depot de la guerre, 3689, f. 156; Navereau, 132 — 
5). Side by side with the spread of workshops, there also 
developed great manufacturing spaces, both homogeneous and 
well defined: first, the combined manufactories, then, in the 
second half of the eighteenth century, the works or factories 
proper (the Chaussade ironworks occupied almost the whole of 
the Medine peninsula, between Nievre and Loire; in order to 
set up the Indret factory in 1777, Wilkinson, by means of 
embankments and dikes, constructed an island on the Loire; 
Toufait built Le Creusot in the valley of the Charbonniere, 
which he transformed, and he had workers’ accommodation 
built in the factory itself); it was a change of scale, but 
it was also a new type of control. The factory was explicitly 
compared with the monastery, the fortress, a walled town; the 
guardian ‘will open the gates only on the return of the 



workers, and after the bell that announces the resumption of 
work has been rung’ ; a quarter of an hour later no one will 
be admitted; at the end of the day, the workshops’ heads 
will hand back the keys to the Swiss guard of the factory, 
who will then open the gates ( Amboise , f. 12,1301). The aim 
is to derive the maximum advantages and to neutralize the 
inconveniences (thefts, interruptions of work, disturbances 
and ‘cabals’ ), as the forces of production become more 
concentrated; to protect materials and tools and to master 
the labour force: ‘The order and inspection that must be 
maintained require that all workers be assembled under the 
same roof, so that the partner who is entrusted with the 
management of the manufactory may prevent and remedy abuses 
that may arise among the workers and arrest their progress at 
the outset’ (Dauphin, 199). 

2. But the principle of ‘enclosure’ is neither constant, 
nor indispensable, nor sufficient in disciplinary machinery. 
This machinery works space in a much more flexible and 
detailed way. It does this first of all on the principle of 
elementary location or partitioning. Each individual has his 
own place; and each place its individual. Avoid distributions 
in groups; break up collective dispositions; analyse 
confused, massive or transient pluralities. Disciplinary 
space tends to be divided into as many sections as there are 
bodies or elements to be distributed. One must eliminate the 
effects of imprecise distributions, the uncontrolled 
disappearance of individuals, their diffuse circulation, 
their unusable and dangerous coagulation; it was a tactic of 
anti-desertion, anti-vagabondage, anti-concentration. Its aim 
was to establish presences and absences, to know where and 
how to locate individuals, to set up useful communications, 
to interrupt others, to be able at each moment to supervise 
the conduct of each individual, to assess it, to judge it, to 
calculate its qualities or merits. It was a procedure, 
therefore, aimed at knowing, mastering and using. Discipline 
organizes an analytical space. 



And there, too, it encountered an old architectural and 
religious method: the monastic cell. Even if the compartments 
it assigns become purely ideal, the disciplinary space is 
always, basically, cellular. Solitude was necessary to both 
body and soul, according to a certain asceticism: they must, 
at certain moments at least, confront temptation and perhaps 
the severity of God alone. ‘Sleep is the image of death, the 
dormitory is the image of the sepulchre ••• although the 
dormitories are shared, the beds are nevertheless arranged in 
such a way and closed so exactly by means of curtains that 
the girls may rise and retire without being seen’ (Reglement 
pour la communaute des filles du Bon Pasteur , in Delamare, 
507). But this is still a very crude form. 

3. The rule of functional sites would gradually, in the 
disciplinary institutions, code a space that architecture 
generally left at the disposal of several different uses. 
Particular places were defined to correspond not only to the 
need to supervise, to break dangerous communications, but 
also to create a useful space. The process appeared clearly 
in the hospitals, especially in the military and naval 
hospitals. In France, it seems that Rochefort served both as 
experiment and model. A port, and a military port is - with 
its circulation of goods, men signed up willingly or by 
force, sailors embarking and disembarking, diseases and 
epidemics - a place of desertion, smuggling, contagion: it 
is a crossroads for dangerous mixtures, a meeting-place for 
forbidden circulations. The naval hospital must therefore 
treat, but in order to do this it must be a filter, a 
mechanism that pins down and partitions; it must provide a 
hold over this whole mobile, swarming mass, by dissipating 
the confusion of illegality and evil. The medical supervision 
of diseases and contagions is inseparable from a whole series 
of other controls: the military control over deserters, 
fiscal control over commodities, administrative control over 
remedies, rations, disappearances, cures, deaths, 
simulations. Hence the need to distribute and partition off 
space in a rigorous manner. The first steps taken at 



Rochefort concerned things rather than men, precious 
commodities, rather than patients. The arrangements of fiscal 
and economic supervision preceded the techniques of medical 
observation: placing of medicines under lock and key, 
recording their use; a little later, a system was worked out 
to verify the real number of patients, their identity, the 
units to which they belonged; then one began to regulate 
their comings and goings; they were forced to remain in their 
wards; to each bed was attached the name of its occupant; 
each individual treated was entered in a register that the 
doctor had to consult during the visit; later came the 
isolation of contagious patients and separate beds. 

Gradually, an administrative and political space was 
articulated upon a therapeutic space; it tended to 
individualize bodies, diseases, symptoms, lives and deaths; 
it constituted a real table of juxtaposed and carefully 
distinct singularities. Out of discipline, a medically useful 
space was born. 

In the factories that appeared at the end of the eighteenth 
century, the principle of individualizing partitioning became 
more complicated. It was a question of distributing 
individuals in a space in which one might isolate them and 
map them; but also of articulating this distribution on a 
production machinery that had its own requirements. The 
distribution of bodies, the spatial arrangement of production 
machinery and the different forms of activity in the 
distribution of ‘posts’ had to be linked together. The 
Oberkampf manufactory at Jouy obeyed this principle. It was 
made up of a series of workshops specified according to each 
broad type of operation: for the printers, the handlers, the 
colourists, the women who touched up the design, the 
engravers, the dyers. The largest of the buildings, built in 
1791, by Toussaint Barre, was 110 metres long and had three 
storeys. The ground floor was devoted mainly to block 
printing; it contained 132 tables arranged in two rows, the 
length of the workshop, which had eighty-eight windows; each 
printer worked at a table with his ‘puller’ , who prepared 



and spread the colours. There were 264 persons in all. At the 
end of each table was a sort of rack on which the material 
that had just been printed was left to dry (Saint-Maur). By 
walking up and down the central aisle of the workshop, it was 
possible to carry out a supervision that was both general and 
individual: to observe the worker’ s presence and 
application, and the quality of his work; to compare workers 
with one another, to classify them according to skill and 
speed; to follow the successive stages of the production 
process. All these serializations formed a permanent grid: 
confusion was eliminated- : that is to say, production was 
divided up and the labour process was articulated, on the one 
hand, according to its stages or elementary operations, and, 
on the other hand, according to the individuals, the 
particular bodies, that carried it out: each variable of this 
force - strength, promptness, skill, constancy - would be 
observed, and therefore characterized, assessed, computed and 
related to the individual who was its particular agent. Thus, 
spread out in a perfectly legible way over the whole series 
of individual bodies, the work force may be analysed in 
individual units. At the emergence of large-scale industry, 
one finds, beneath the division of the production process, 
the individualizing fragmentation of labour power; the 
distributions of the disciplinary space often assured both. 

4. In discipline, the elements are interchangeable, since 
each is defined by the place it occupies in a series, and by 
the gap that separates it from the others. The unit is, 
therefore, neither the territory (unit of domination), nor 
the place (unit of residence), but the rank : the place one 
occupies in a classification, the point at which a line and a 
column intersect, the interval in a series of intervals that 
one may traverse one after the other. Discipline is an art of 
rank, a technique for the transformation of arrangements. It 
individualizes bodies by a location that does not give them a 
fixed position, but distributes them and circulates them in a 
network of relations. 


Take the example of the ‘class’ . In the Jesuit colleges, 
one still found an organization that was at once binary and 
unified; the classes, which might comprise up to two or three 
hundred pupils, were subdivided into groups of ten; each of 
these groups, with its ‘decurion’ , was placed in a camp, 
Roman or Carthaginian; each ‘decury’ had its counterpart in 
the opposing camp. The general form was that of war and 
rivalry; work, apprenticeship and classification were carried 
out in the form of the joust, through the confrontation of 
two armies; the contribution of each pupil was inscribed in 
this general duel; it contributed to the victory or the 
defeat of a whole camp; and the pupils were assigned a place 
that corresponded to the function of each individual and to 
his value as a combatant in the unitary group of his 
‘decury’ (Rochemonteix, 51ff). It should be observed 
moreover that this Roman comedy made it possible to link, to 
the binary exercises of rivalry, a spatial disposition 
inspired by the legion, with rank, hierarchy, pyramidal 
supervision. One should not forget that, generally speaking, 
the Roman model, at the Enlightenment, played a dual role: in 
its republican aspect, it was the very embodiment of liberty; 
in its military aspect, it was the ideal schema of 
discipline. The Rome of the eighteenth century and of the 
Revolution was the Rome of the Senate, but it was also that 
of the legion; it was the Rome of the Forum, but it was also 
that of the camps. Up to the empire, the Roman reference 
transmitted, somewhat ambiguously, the juridical ideal of 
citizenship and the technique of disciplinary methods. In any 
case, the strictly disciplinary element in the ancient fable 
used by the Jesuit colleges came to dominate the element of 
joust and mock warfare. Gradually - but especially after 
1762 - the educational space unfolds; the class becomes 
homogeneous, it is no longer made up of individual elements 
arranged side by side under the master’ s eye. In the 
eighteenth century, ‘rank’ begins to define the great form 
of distribution of individuals in the educational order: rows 
or ranks of pupils in the class, corridors, courtyards; rank 



attributed to each pupil at the end of each task and each 
examination; the rank he obtains from week to week, month to 
month, year to year; an alignment of age groups, one after 
another; a succession of subjects taught and questions 
treated, according to an order of increasing difficulty. And, 
in this ensemble of compulsory alignments, each pupil, 
according to his age, his performance, his behaviour, 
occupies sometimes one rank, sometimes another; he moves 
constantly over a series of compartments - some of these are 
‘ideal’ compartments, marking a hierarchy of knowledge or 
ability, others express the distribution of values or merits 
in material terms in the space of the college or classroom. 

It is a perpetual movement in which individuals replace one 
another in a space marked off by aligned intervals. 

The organization of a serial space was one of the great 
technical mutations of elementary education. It made it 
possible to supersede the traditional system (a pupil working 
for a few minutes with the master, while the rest of the 
heterogeneous group remained idle and unattended). By 
assigning individual places it made possible the supervision 
of each individual and the simultaneous work of all. It 
organized a new economy of the time of apprenticeship. It 
made the educational space function like a learning machine, 
but also as a machine for supervising, hierarchizing, 
rewarding. Jean~Baptiste de La Salle dreamt of a classroom in 
which the spatial distribution might provide a whole series 
of distinctions at once: according to the pupils’ progress, 
worth, character, application, cleanliness and parents’ 
fortune. Thus, the classroom would form a single great table, 
with many different entries, under the scrupulously 
‘classificatory’ eye of the master: ‘In every class there 
will be places assigned for all the pupils of all the 
lessons, so that all those attending the same lesson will 
always occupy the same place. Pupils attending the highest 
lessons will be placed in the benches closest to the wall, 
followed by the others according to the order of the lessons 
moving towards the middle of the classroom ••• Each of the 



pupils will have his place assigned to him and none of them 
will leave it or change it except on the order or with the 
consent of the school inspector. ’ Things must be so arranged 
that ‘those whose parents are neglectful and verminous must 
be separated from those who are careful and clean; that an 
unruly and frivolous pupil should be placed between two who 
are well behaved and serious, a libertine either alone or 
between two pious pupils’ . - 

In organizing ‘cells’ , ‘places’ and ‘ranks’ , the 
disciplines create complex spaces that are at once 
architectural, functional and hierarchical. It is spaces that 
provide fixed positions and permit circulation; they carve 
out individual segments and establish operational links; they 
mark places and indicate values; they guarantee the obedience 
of individuals, but also a better economy of time and 
gesture. They are mixed spaces: real because they govern the 
disposition of buildings, rooms, furniture, but also ideal, 
because they are projected over this arrangement of 
characterizations, assessments, hierarchies. The first of the 
great operations of discipline is, therefore, the 
constitution of ‘tableaux vivants’ , which transform the 
confused, useless or dangerous multitudes into ordered 
multiplicities. The drawing up of ‘tables’ was one of the 
great problems of the scientific, political and economic 
technology of the eighteenth century: how one was to arrange 
botanical and zoological gardens, and construct at the same 
time rational classifications of living beings; how one was 
to observe, supervise, regularize the circulation of 
commodities and money and thus build up an economic table 
that might serve as the principle of the increase of wealth; 
how one was to inspect men, observe their presence and 
absence and constitute a general and permanent register of 
the armed forces; how one was to distribute patients, 
separate them from one another, divide up the hospital space 
and make a systematic classification of diseases: these were 
all twin operations in which the two elements - distribution 
and analysis, supervision and intelligibility - are 


inextricably bound up. In the eighteenth century, the table 
was both a technique of power and a procedure of knowledge. 

It was a question of organizing the multiple, of providing 
oneself with an instrument to cover it and to master it; it 
was a question of imposing upon it an ‘order’ . Like the 
army general of whom Guibert spoke, the naturalist, the 
physician, the economist was ‘blinded by the immensity, 
dazed by the multitude ••• the innumerable combinations that 
result from the multiplicity of objects, so many concerns 
together form a burden above his strength. In perfecting 
itself, in approaching true principles, the science of modern 
warfare might become simpler and less difficult’ ; armies 
‘with simple, similar tactics, capable of being adapted to 
every movement ••• would be easier to move and lead’ 

(Guibert, xxxvi). Tactics, the spatial ordering of men; 
taxonomy, the disciplinary space of natural beings; the 
economic table, the regulated movement of wealth. 

But the table does not have the same function in these 
different registers. In the order of the economy, it makes 
possible the measurement of quantities and the analysis of 
movements. In the form of taxonomy, it has the function of 
characterizing (and consequently reducing individual 
singularities) and constituting classes (and therefore of 
excluding considerations of number). But in the form of the 
disciplinary distribution, on the other hand, the table has 
the function of treating multiplicity itself, distributing it 
and deriving from it as many effects as possible. Whereas 
natural taxonomy is situated on the axis that links character 
and category, disciplinary tactics is situated on the axis 
that links the singular and the multiple. It allows both the 
characterization of the individual as individual and the 
ordering of a given multiplicity. It is the first condition 
for the control and use of an ensemble of distinct elements: 
the base for a micro-physics of what might be called a 
‘cellular’ power. 


The control of activity 



1. The time-table is an old inheritance. The strict model was 
no doubt suggested by the monastic communities. It soon 
spread. Its three great methods - establish rhythms, impose 
particular occupations, regulate the cycles of repetition - 
were soon to be found in schools, workshops and hospitals. 

The new disciplines had no difficulty in taking up their 
place in the old forms; the schools and poorhouses extended 
the life and the regularity of the monastic communities to 
which they were often attached. The rigours of the industrial 
period long retained a religious air; in the seventeenth 
century, the regulations of the great manufactories laid down 
the exercises that would divide up the working day: ‘On 
arrival in the morning, before beginning their work, all 
persons shall wash their hands, offer up their work to God 
and make the sign of the cross’ (Saint-Maur, article 1); but 
even in the nineteenth century, when the rural populations 
were needed in industry, they were sometimes formed into 
‘congregations’ , in an attempt to inure them to work in the 
workshops; the framework of the ‘factory - monastery’ was 
imposed upon the workers. In the Protestant armies of Maurice 
of Orange and Gustavus Adolphus, military discipline was 
achieved through a rhythmics of time punctuated by pious 
exercises; army life, Boussanelle was later to say, should 
have some of the ‘perfections of the cloister itself’ 
(Boussanelle, 2; on the religious character of discipline in 
the Swedish army, cf. The Swedish Discipline, London, 1632). 
For centuries, the religious orders had been masters of 
discipline: they were the specialists of time, the great 
technicians of rhythm and regular activities. But the 
disciplines altered these methods of temporal regulation from 
which they derived. They altered them first by refining them. 
One began to count in quarter hours, in minutes, in seconds. 
This happened in the army, of course: Guibert systematically 
implemented the chronometric measurement of shooting that had 
been suggested earlier by Vauban. In the elementary schools, 
the division of time became increasingly minute; activities 
were governed in detail by orders that had to be obeyed 



immediately: ‘At the last stroke of the hour, a pupil will 

ring the bell, and at the first sound of the bell all the 
pupils will kneel, with their arms crossed and their eyes 
lowered. When the prayer has been said, the teacher will 
strike the signal once to indicate that the pupils should get 
up, a second time as a sign that they should salute Christ, 
and a third that they should sit down’ (La Salle, Conduite 
••*, 27-8). In the early nineteenth century, the following 
time-table was suggested for the Ecoles mutuelles, or 
‘mutual improvement schools’ : 8.45 entrance of the monitor, 
8. 52 the monitor’ s summons, 8. 56 entrance of the children 
and prayer, 9.00 the children go to their benches, 9.04 first 
slate, 9. 08 end of dictation, 9. 12 second slate, etc. 
(Tronchot, 221). The gradual extension of the wage-earning 
class brought with it a more detailed partitioning of time: 

‘If workers arrive later than a quarter of an hour after the 
ringing of the bell •••’ (Amboise, article 2); ‘if any one 
of the companions is asked for during work and loses more 
than five minutes •••’ , ‘anyone who is not at his work at 
the correct time •••’ (Oppenheim, article 7-8). But an 
attempt is also made to assure the quality of the time used: 
constant supervision, the pressure of supervisors, the 
elimination of anything that might disturb or distract; it is 
a question of constituting a totally useful time: ‘It is 
expressly forbidden during work to amuse one’ s companions by 
gestures or in any other way, to play at any game whatsoever, 
to eat, to sleep, to tell stories and comedies’ (Oppenheim, 
article 16) ; and even during the meal-break, ‘there will be 
no telling of stories, adventures or other such talk that 
distracts the workers from their work’ ; ‘it is expressly 
forbidden for any worker, under any pretext, to bring wine 
into the manufactory and to drink in the workshops’ 

{Amboise, article 4). Time measured and paid must also be a 
time without impurities or defects; a time of good quality, 
throughout which the body is constantly applied to its 
exercise. Precision and application are, with regularity, the 
fundamental virtues of disciplinary time. But this is not the 



newest thing about it. Other methods are more characteristic 
of the disciplines. 

2. The temporal elaboration of the act. There are, for 
example, two ways of controlling marching troops. In the 
early seventeenth century, we have: ‘Accustomed soldiers 
marching in file or in battalion to march to the rhythm of 
the drum. And to do this, one must begin with the right foot 
so that the whole troop raises the same foot at the same 
time’ (Montgommery, 86). In the mid-eighteenth century, 
there are four sorts of steps: ‘The length of the the short 
step will be a foot, that of the ordinary step, the double 
step and the marching step will be two feet, the whole 
measured from one heel to the next; as for the duration, that 
of the small step and the ordinary step will last one second, 
during which two double steps would be performed; the 
duration of the marching step will be a little longer than 
one second. The oblique step will take one second; it will be 
at most eighteen inches from one heel to the next ••*. The 
ordinary step will be executed forwards, holding the head up 
high and the body erect, holding oneself in balance 
successively on a single leg, and bringing the other 
forwards, the ham taut, the point of the foot a little turned 
outwards and low, so that one may without affectation brush 
the ground on which one must walk and place one’ s foot, in 
such a way that each part may come to rest there at the same 
time without striking the ground’ ( ‘Ordonnance du l cr 
janvier 1766, pour regler 1’ exercise de 1’ infanterie’ ). 
Between these two instructions, a new set of restraints had 
been brought into play, another degree of precision in the 
breakdown of gestures and movements, another way of adjusting 
the body to temporal imperatives. 

What the ordinance of 1766 defines is not a time-table - 
the general framework for an activity; it is rather a 
collective and obligatory rhythm, imposed from the outside; 
it is a ‘programme’ ; it assures the elaboration of the act 
itself; it controls its development and its stages from the 
inside. We have passed from a form of injunction that 



measured or punctuated gestures to a web that constrains them 
or sustains them throughout their entire succession. A sort 
of anatomo-chronological schema of behaviour is defined. The 
act is broken down into its elements; the position of the 
body, limbs, articulations is defined; to each movement are 
assigned a direction, an aptitude, a duration; their order of 
succession is prescribed. Time penetrates the body and with 
it all the meticulous controls of power. 

3. Hence the correlation of the body and the gesture. 
Disciplinary control does not consist simply in teaching or 
imposing a series of particular gestures; it imposes the best 
relation between a gesture and the overall position of the 
body, which is its condition of efficiency and speed. In the 
correct use of the body, which makes possible a correct use 
of time, nothing must remain idle or useless: everything must 
be called upon to form the support of the act required. A 
well-disciplined body forms the operational context of the 
slightest gesture. Good handwriting, for example, presupposes 
a gymnastics - a whole routine whose rigorous code invests 
the body in its entirety, from the points of the feet to the 
tip of the index finger. The pupils must always ‘hold their 
bodies erect, somewhat turned and free on the left side, 
slightly inclined, so that, with the elbow placed on the 
table, the chin can be rested upon the hand, unless this were 
to interfere with the view; the left leg must be somewhat 
more forward under the table than the right. A distance of 
two fingers must be left between the body and the table; for 
not only does one write with more alertness, but nothing is 
more harmful to the health than to acquire the habit of 
pressing one’ s stomach against the table; the part of the 
left arm from the elbow to the hand must be placed on the 
table. The right arm must be at a distance from the body of 
about three fingers and be about five fingers from the table, 
on which it must rest lightly. The teacher will place the 
pupils in the posture that they should maintain when writing, 
and will correct it either by sign or otherwise, when they 



change this position’ (La Salle, Conduite ••*, 63-4). A 
disciplined body is the prerequisite of an efficient gesture. 

4. The body - object articulation. Discipline defines each 
of the relations that the body must have with the object that 
it manipulates. Between them, it outlines a meticulous 
meshing. ‘Bring the weapon forward. In three stages. Raise 
the rifle with the right hand, bringing it close to the body 
so as to hold it perpendicular with the right knee, the end 
of the barrel at eye level, grasping it by striking it with 
the right hand, the arm held close to the body at waist 
height. At the second stage, bring the rifle in front of you 
with the left hand, the barrel in the middle between the two 
eyes, vertical, the right hand grasping it at the small of 
the butt, the arm outstretched, the trigger-guard resting on 
the first finger, the left hand at the height of the notch, 
the thumb lying along the barrel against the moulding. At the 
third stage, let go of the rifle with the left hand, which 
falls along the thigh, raising the rifle with the right hand, 
the lock outwards and opposite the chest, the right arm half 
flexed, the elbow close to the body, the thumb lying against 
the lock, resting against the first screw, the hammer resting 
on the first finger, the barrel perpendicular’ ( ‘Ordonnance 
du l cr janvier 1766 ••*, titre XI, article 2’ ). This is an 
example of what might be called the instrumental coding of 
the body. It consists of a breakdown of the total gesture 
into two parallel series: that of the parts of the body to be 
used (right hand, left hand, different fingers of the hand, 
knee, eye, elbow, etc.) and that of the parts of the object 
manipulated (barrel, notch, hammer, screw, etc. ) ; then the 
two sets of parts are correlated together according to a 
number of simple gestures (rest, bend); lastly, it fixes the 
canonical succession in which each of these correlations 
occupies a particular place. This obligatory syntax is what 
the military theoreticians of the eighteenth century called 
' manoeuvre' . The traditional recipe gives place to explicit 
and obligatory prescriptions. Over the whole surface of 
contact between the body and the object it handles, power is 



introduced, fastening them to one another. It constitutes a 
body-weapon, body-tool, body-machine complex. One is as far 
as possible from those forms of subjection that demanded of 
the body only signs or products, forms of expression or the 
result of labour. The regulation imposed by power is at the 
same time the law of construction of the operation. Thus 
disciplinary power appears to have the function not so much 
of deduction as of synthesis, not so much of exploitation of 
the product as of coercive link with the apparatus of 
production. 

5. Exhaustive use. The principle that underlay the time¬ 
table in its traditional form was essentially negative; it 
was the principle of non-idleness: it was forbidden to waste 
time, which was counted by God and paid for by men; the time¬ 
table was to eliminate the danger of wasting it - a moral 
offence and economic dishonesty. Discipline, on the other 
hand, arranges a positive economy; it poses the principle of 
a theoretically ever-growing use of time: exhaustion rather 
than use; it is a question of extracting, from time, ever 
more available moments and, from each moment, ever more 
useful forces. This means that one must seek to intensify the 
use of the slightest moment, as if time, in its very 
fragmentation, were inexhaustible or as if, at least by an 
ever more detailed internal arrangement, one could tend 
towards an ideal point at which one maintained maximum speed 
and maximum efficiency. It was precisely this that was 
implemented in the celebrated regulations of the Prussian 
infantry that the whole of Europe imitated after the 
victories of Frederick II:- the more time is broken down, 
the more its subdivisions multiply, the better one 
disarticulates it by deploying its internal elements under a 
gaze that supervises them, the more one can accelerate an 
operation, or at least regulate it according to an optimum 
speed; hence this regulation of the time of an action that 
was so important in the army and which was to be so 
throughout the entire technology of human activity: the 
Prussian regulations of 1743 laid down six stages to bring 


the weapon to one’ s foot, four to extend it, thirteen to 
raise it to the shoulder, etc. By other means, the ‘mutual 
improvement school’ was also arranged as a machine to 
intensify the use of time; its organization made it possible 
to obviate the linear, successive character of the master’ s 
teaching: it regulated the counterpoint of operations 
performed, at the same moment, by different groups of pupils 
under the direction of monitors and assistants, so that each 
passing moment was filled with many different, but ordered 
activities; and, on the other hand, the rhythm imposed by 
signals, whistles, orders imposed on everyone temporal norms 
that were intended both to accelerate the process of learning 
and to teach speed as a virtue;- ‘the sole aim of these 
commands ••• is to accustom the children to executing well and 
quickly the same operations, to diminish as far as possible 
by speed the loss of time caused by moving from one operation 
to another’ (Bernard). 

Through this technique of subjection a new object was being 
formed; slowly, it superseded the mechanical body - the body 
composed of solids and assigned movements, the image of which 
had for so long haunted those who dreamt of disciplinary 
perfection. This new object is the natural body, the bearer 
of forces and the seat of duration; it is the body 
susceptible to specified operations, which have their order, 
their stages, their internal conditions, their constituent 
elements. In becoming the target for new mechanisms of power, 
the body is offered up to new forms of knowledge. It is the 
body of exercise, rather than of speculative physics; a body 
manipulated by authority, rather than imbued with animal 
spirits; a body of useful training and not of rational 
mechanics, but one in which, by virtue of that very fact, a 
number of natural requirements and functional constraints are 
beginning to emerge. This is the body that Guibert discovered 
in his critique of excessively artificial movements. In the 
exercise that is imposed upon it and which it resists, the 
body brings out its essential correlations and spontaneously 
rejects the incompatible: ‘On entering most of our training 


schools, one sees all those unfortunate soldiers in 
constricting and forced attitudes, one sees all their muscles 
contracted, the circulation of their blood interrupted ••• If 
we studied the intention of nature and the construction of 
the human body, we would find the position and the bearing 
that nature clearly prescribes for the soldier. The head must 
be erect, standing out from the shoulders, sitting 
perpendicularly between them. It must be turned neither to 
left nor to right, because, in view of the correspondence 
between the vertebrae of the neck and the shoulder-blade to 
which they are attached, none of them may move in a circular 
manner without slightly bringing with it from the same side 
that it moves one of the shoulders and because, the body no 
longer being placed squarely, the soldier can no longer walk 
straight in front of him or serve as a point of alignment ••• 
Since the hip-bone, which the ordinance indicates as the 
point against which the butt end should rest, is not situated 
the same in all men, the rifle must be placed more to the 
right for some, and more to the left for others. For the same 
reason of inequality of structure, the trigger-guard is more 
or less pressed against the body, depending on whether the 
outer parts of a man’ s shoulder is more or less fleshy’ 
(Guibert, 21 - 2). 

We have seen how the procedures of disciplinary 
distribution had their place among the contemporary 
techniques of classification and tabulation; but also how 
they introduced into them the specific problem of individuals 
and multiplicity. Similarly, the disciplinary controls of 
activity belonged to a whole series of researches, 
theoretical or practical, into the natural machinery of 
bodies; but they began to discover in them specific 
processes; behaviour and its organized requirements gradually 
replaced the simple physics of movement. The body, required 
to be docile in its minutest operations, opposes and shows 
the conditions of functioning proper to an organism. 
Disciplinary power has as its correlative an individuality 



that is not only analytical and ‘cellular 7 , but also 
natural and ‘organic 7 . 

The organization of geneses 

In 1667, the edict that set up the manufactory of the 
Gobelins envisaged the organization of a school. Sixty 
scholarship children were to be chosen by the superintendent 
of royal buildings, entrusted for a time to a master whose 
task it would be to provide them with ‘upbringing and 
instruction’ , then apprenticed to the various master 
tapestry makers of the manufactory (who by virtue of this 
fact received compensation deducted from the pupils 7 
scholarships); after six years 7 apprenticeship, four years 
of service and a qualifying examination, they were given the 
right to ‘set up and run a shop 7 in any town of the 
kingdom. We find here the characteristics of guild 
apprenticeship: the relation of dependence on the master that 
is both individual and total; the statutory duration of the 
training, which is concluded by a qualifying examination, but 
which is not broken down according to a precise programme; an 
overall exchange between the master who must give his 
knowledge and the apprentice who must offer his services, his 
assistance and often some payment. The form of domestic 
service is mixed with a transference of knowledge.- In 1737, 
an edict organized a school of drawing for the apprentices of 
the Gobelins; it was not intended to replace the training 
given by the master workers, but to complement it. It 
involved a quite different arrangement of time. Two hours a 
day, except on Sundays and feast days, the pupils met in the 
school. A roll-call was taken, from a list on the wall; the 
absentees were noted down in a register. The school was 
divided into three classes. The first for those who had no 
notion of drawing; they were made to copy models, which were 
more or less difficult according to the abilities of each 
pupil. The second ‘for those who already have some 
principles 7 , or who had passed through the first class; they 


had to reproduce pictures ‘at sight, without tracing’ , but 
considering only the drawing. In the third class, they learnt 
colouring and pastel drawing, and were introduced to the 
theory and practice of dyeing. The pupils performed 
individual tasks at regular intervals; each of these 
exercises, signed with the name of its author and date of 
execution, was handed in to the teacher; the best were 
rewarded; assembled together at the end of the year and 
compared, they made it possible to establish the progress, 
the present ability and the relative place of each pupil; it 
was then decided which of them could pass into the next 
class. A general book, kept by the teachers and their 
assistants, recorded from day to day the behaviour of the 
pupils and everything that happened in the school; it was 
periodically shown to an inspector (Gerspach, 1892). 

The Gobelins school is only one example of an important 
phenomenon: the development, in the classical period, of a 
new technique for taking charge of the time of individual 
existences; for regulating the relations of time, bodies and 
forces; for assuring an accumulation of duration; and for 
turning to ever-increased profit or use the movement of 
passing time. How can one capitalize the time of individuals, 
accumulate it in each of them, in their bodies, in their 
forces or in their abilities, in a way that is susceptible of 
use and control? How can one organize profitable durations? 
The disciplines, which analyse space, break up and rearrange 
activities, must also be understood as machinery for adding 
up and capitalizing time. This was done in four ways, which 
emerge most clearly in military organization. 

1. Divide duration into successive or parallel segments, 
each of which must end at a specific time. For example, 
isolate the period of training and the period of practice; do 
not mix the instruction of recruits and the exercise of 
veterans; open separate military schools for the armed 
service (in 1764, the creation of the Ecole Militaire in 
Paris, in 1776 the creation of twelve schools in the 
provinces); recruit professional soldiers at the youngest 



possible age, take children, ‘have them adopted by the 
nation, and brought up in special schools’ (Servan, J. , 

456); teach in turn posture, marching, the handling of 
weapons, shooting, and do not pass to another activity until 
the first has been completely mastered: ‘One of the 
principal mistakes is to show a soldier every exercise at 
once’ ( ‘Reglement de 1743 •••’ ); in short, break down time 
into separate and adjusted threads. 2. Organize these threads 
according to an analytical plan - successions of elements as 
simple as possible, combining according to increasing 
complexity. This presupposes that instruction should abandon 
the principle of analogical repetition. In the sixteenth 
century, military exercise consisted above all in copying all 
or part of the action, and of generally increasing the 
soldier’ s skill or strength;- in the eighteenth century, 
the instruction of the ‘manual’ followed the principle of 
the ‘elementary’ and not of the ‘exemplary’ : simple 
gestures - the position of the fingers, the bend of the leg, 
the movement of the arms - basic elements for useful actions 
that also provide a general training in strength, skill, 
docility. 3. Finalize these temporal segments, decide on how 
long each will last and conclude it with an examination, 
which will have the triple function of showing whether the 
subject has reached the level required, of guaranteeing that 
each subject undergoes the same apprenticeship and of 
differentiating the abilities of each individual. When the 
sergeants, corporals, etc. ‘entrusted with the task of 
instructing the others, are of the opinion that a particular 
soldier is ready to pass into the first class, they will 
present him first to the officers of their company, who will 
carefully examine him; if they do not find him sufficiently 
practised, they will refuse to admit him; if, on the other 
hand, the man presented seems to them to be ready, the said 
officers will themselves propose him to the commanding 
officer of the regiment, who will see him if he thinks it 
necessary, and will have him examined by the senior officers. 
The slightest mistakes will be enough to have him rejected, 


and no one will be able to pass from the second class to the 
first until he has undergone this first examination’ 

(Instruction par 1’ exercise de 1’ infanterie, 14 mai 1754). 

4. Draw up series of series; lay down for each individual, 
according to his level, his seniority, his rank, the 
exercises that are suited to him; common exercises have a 
differing role and each difference involves specific 
exercises. At the end of each series, others begin, branch 
off and subdivide in turn. Thus each individual is caught up 
in a temporal series which specifically defines his level or 
his rank. It is a disciplinary polyphony of exercises: 

‘Soldiers of the second class will be exercised every 
morning by sergeants, corporals, anspessades, lance-corporals 
••• The lance-corporals will be exercised every Sunday by the 
head of the section •••; the corporals and anspessades will be 
exercised every Tuesday afternoon by the sergeants and their 
company and these in turn on the afternoons of every second, 
twelfth and twenty-second day of each month by senior 
officers’ ( Instruction •••). 

It is this disciplinary time that was gradually imposed on 
pedagogical practice - specializing the time of training and 
detaching it from the adult time, from the time of mastery; 
arranging different stages, separated from one another by 
graded examinations; drawing up programmes, each of which 
must take place during a particular stage and which involves 
exercises of increasing difficulty; qualifying individuals 
according to the way in which they progress through these 
series. For the ‘initiatory’ time of traditional training 
(an overall time, supervised by the master alone, authorized 
by a single examination), disciplinary time had substituted 
its multiple and progressive series. A whole analytical 
pedagogy was being formed, meticulous in its detail (it broke 
down the subject being taught into its simplest elements, it 
hierarchized each stage of development into small steps) and 
also very precocious in its history (it largely anticipated 
the genetic analyses of the ideologues, whose technical model 
it appears to have been). At the beginning of the eighteenth 



century, Demia suggested a division of the process of 
learning to read into seven levels: the first for those who 
are beginning to learn the letters, the second for those who 
are learning to spell, the third for those who are learning 
to join syllables together to make words, the fourth for 
those who are reading Latin in sentences or from punctuation 
to punctuation, the fifth for those who are beginning to read 
French, the sixth for the best readers, the seventh for those 
who can read manuscripts. But, where there are a great many 
pupils, further subdivisions would have to be introduced; the 
first class would comprise four streams: one for those who 
are learning the ‘simple letters’ ; a second for those who 
are learning the ‘mixed’ letters; a third for those who are 
learning the abbreviated letters (a, e •••) ; a fourth for 
those who are learning the double letters (ff, ss, tt, st). 
The second class would be divided into three streams: for 
those who ‘count each letter aloud before spelling the 
syllable, D. 0., DO’ ; for those ‘who spell the most 
difficult syllables, such as bant, brand, spinx , etc. 

(Demia, 19-20). Each stage in the combinatory of elements 
must be inscribed within a great temporal series, which is 
both a natural progress of the mind and a code for educative 
procedures. 

The ‘seriation’ of successive activities makes possible a 
whole investment of duration by power: the possibility of a 
detailed control and a regular intervention (of 
differentiation, correction, punishment, elimination) in each 
moment of time; the possibility of characterizing, and 
therefore of using individuals according to the level in the 
series that they are moving through; the possibility of 
accumulating time and activity, of rediscovering them, 
totalized and usable in a final result, which is the ultimate 
capacity of an individual. Temporal dispersal is brought 
together to produce a profit, thus mastering a duration that 
would otherwise elude one’ s grasp. Power is articulated 
directly onto time; it assures its control and guarantees its 


use. 



The disciplinary methods reveal a linear time whose moments 
are integrated, one upon another, and which is orientated 
towards a terminal, stable point; in short, an ‘evolutive’ 
time. But it must be recalled that, at the same moment, the 
administrative and economic techniques of control reveal a 
social time of a serial, orientated, cumulative type: the 
discovery of an evolution in terms of ‘progress’ . The 
disciplinary techniques reveal individual series: the 
discovery of an evolution in terms of ‘genesis’ . These two 
great ‘discoveries’ of the eighteenth century - the 
progress of societies and the geneses of individuals - were 
perhaps correlative with the new techniques of power, and 
more specifically, with a new way of administering time and 
making it useful, by segmentation, seriation, synthesis and 
totalization. A macro- and a micro-physics of power made 
possible, not the invention of history (it had long had no 
need of that), but the integration of a temporal, unitary, 
continuous, cumulative dimension in the exercise of controls 
and the practice of dominations. ‘Evolutive’ historicity, 
as it was then constituted - and so profoundly that it is 
still self-evident for many today - is bound up with a mode 
of functioning of power. No doubt it is as if the ‘history¬ 
remembering’ of the chronicles, genealogies, exploits, 
reigns and deeds had long been linked to a modality of power. 
With the new techniques of subjection, the ‘dynamics’ of 
continuous evolutions tends to replace the ‘dynasties’ of 
solemn events. 

In any case, the small temporal continuum of individuality- 
genesis certainly seems to be, like the individuality-cell or 
the individuality-organism, an effect and an object of 
discipline. And, at the centre of this seriation of time, one 
finds a procedure that is, for it, what the drawing up of 
‘tables’ was for the distribution of individuals and 
cellular segmentation, or, again, what ‘ manoeuvre ’ was for 
the economy of activities and organic control. This procedure 
is ‘exercise’ . Exercise is that technique by which one 
imposes on the body tasks that are both repetitive and 



different, but always graduated. By bending behaviour towards 
a terminal state, exercise makes possible a perpetual 
characterization of the individual either in relation to this 
term, in relation to other individuals, or in relation to a 
type of itinerary. It thus assures, in the form of continuity 
and constraint, a growth, an observation, a qualification. 
Before adopting this strictly disciplinary form, exercise had 
a long history: it is to be found in military, religious and 
university practices either as initiation ritual, preparatory 
ceremony, theatrical rehearsal or examination. Its linear, 
continuously progressive organization, its genetic 
development in time were, at least in the army and the 
school, introduced at a later date - and were no doubt of 
religious origin. In any case, the idea of an educational 
‘programme’ that would follow the child to the end of his 
schooling and which would involve from year to year, month to 
month, exercises of increasing complexity, first appeared, it 
seems, in a religious group, the Brothers of the Common Life 
(cf. Meir, 160 ff). Strongly inspired by Ruysbroek and 
Rhenish mysticism, they transposed certain of the spiritual 
techniques to education - and to the education not only of 
clerks, but also of magistrates and merchants: the theme of a 
perfection towards which the exemplary master guides the 
pupil became with them that of an authoritarian perfection of 
the pupils by the teacher; the ever-increasing rigorous 
exercises that the ascetic life proposed became tasks of 
increasing complexity that marked the gradual acquisition of 
knowledge and good behaviour; the striving of the whole 
community towards salvation became the collective, permanent 
competition of individuals being classified in relation to 
one another. Perhaps it was these procedures of community 
life and salvation that were the first nucleus of methods 
intended to produce individually characterized, but 
collectively useful aptitudes.- In its, mystical or ascetic 
form, exercise was a way of ordering earthly time for the 
conquest of salvation. It was gradually, in the history of 
the West, to change direction while preserving certain of its 


characteristics; it served to economize the time of life, to 
accumulate it in a useful form and to exercise power over men 
through the mediation of time arranged in this way. Exercise, 
having become an element in the political technology of the 
body and of duration, does not culminate in a beyond, but 
tends towards a subjection that has never reached its limit. 

The composition of forces 

‘Let us begin by destroying the old prejudice, according to 
which one believed one was increasing the strength of a troop 
by increasing its depth. All the physical laws of movement 
become chimeras when one wishes to adapt them to tactics. ’ - 
From the end of the seventeenth century, the technical 
problem of infantry had been freed from the physical model of 
mass. In an army of pikes and muskets - slow, imprecise, 
practically incapable of selecting a target and taking aim - 
troops were used as a projectile, a wall or a fortress: ‘the 
formidable infantry of the army of Spain’ ; the distribution 
of soldiers in this mass was carried out above all according 
to their seniority and their bravery; at the centre, with the 
task of providing weight and volume, of giving density to the 
body, were the least experienced; in front, at the angles and 
on the flanks, were the bravest or reputedly most skilful 
soldiers. In the course of the classical period, one passed 
over to a whole set of delicate articulations. The unit - 
regiment, battalion, section and, later, ‘division’ — - 

became a sort of machine with many parts, moving in relation 
to one another, in order to arrive at a configuration and to 
obtain a specific result. What were the reasons for this 
mutation? Some were economic: to make each individual useful 
and the training, maintenance, and arming of troops 
profitable; to give to each soldier, a precious unit, maximum 
efficiency. But these economic reasons could become 
determinant only with a technical transformation: the 
invention of the rifle:— more accurate, more rapid than the 
musket, it gave greater value to the soldier’ s skill; more 


capable of reaching a particular target, it made it possible 
to exploit fire-power at an individual level; and, 
conversely, it turned every soldier into a possible target, 
requiring by the same token greater mobility; it involved 
therefore the disappearance of a technique of masses in 
favour of an art that distributed units and men along 
extended, relatively flexible, mobile lines. Hence the need 
to find a whole calculated practice of individual and 
collective dispositions, movements of groups or isolated 
elements, changes of position, of movement from one 
disposition to another; in short, the need to invent a 
machinery whose principle would no longer be the mobile or 
immobile mass, but a geometry of divisible segments whose 
basic unity was the mobile soldier with his rifle;— and, no 
doubt, below the soldier himself, the minimal gestures, the 
elementary stages of actions, the fragments of spaces 
occupied or traversed. 

The same problems arose when it was a question of 
constituting a productive force whose effect had to be 
superior to the sum of elementary forces that composed it: 

‘The combined working-day produces, relatively to an equal 
sum of working-days, a greater quantity of use-values, and, 
consequently, diminishes the labour-time necessary for the 
production of a given useful effect. Whether the combined 
working-day, in a given case, acquires this increased 
productive power, because it heightens the mechanical force 
of labour, or extends its sphere of action over a greater 
space, or contracts the field of production relatively to the 
scale of production, or at the critical moment sets large 
masses of labour to work ••• the special productive power of 
the combined working-day is, under all circumstances, the 
social productive power of labour, or the productive power of 
social labour. This power is due to cooperation itself’ 

(Marx, Capital, vol. 1, 311-12). On several occasions, Marx 
stresses the analogy between the problems of the division of 
labour and those of military tactics. For example: ‘Just as 
the offensive power of a squadron of cavalry, or the 


defensive power of a regiment of infantry, is essentially 
different from the sum of the offensive or defensive powers 
of the individual cavalry or infantry soldiers taken 
separately, so the sum total of the mechanical forces exerted 
by isolated workmen differs from the social force that is 
developed, when many hands take part simultaneously in one 
and the same undivided operation’ (Marx, Capital, vol. 1, 
308). 

Thus a new demand appears to which discipline must respond: 
to construct a machine whose effect will be maximized by the 
concerted articulation of the elementary parts of which it is 
composed. Discipline is no longer simply an art of 
distributing bodies, of extracting time from them and 
accumulating it, but of composing forces in order to obtain 
an efficient machine. This demand is expressed in several 
ways. 

1. The individual body becomes an element that may be 
placed, moved, articulated on others. Its bravery or its 
strength are no longer the principal variables that define 
it; but the place it occupies, the interval it covers, the 
regularity, the good order according to which it operates its 
movements. The soldier is above all a fragment of mobile 
space, before he is courage or honour. Guibert describes the 
soldier in the following way: ‘When he is under arms, he 
occupies two feet along his greatest diameter, that is to 
say, taking him from one end to the other, and about one foot 
in his greatest thickness taken from the chest to the 
shoulders, to which one must add an interval of a foot 
between him and the next man; this gives two feet in all 
directions per soldier and indicates that a troop of infantry 
in battle occupies, either in its front or in its depth, as 
many steps as it has ranks’ (Guibert, 27). This is a 
functional reduction of the body. But it is also an insertion 
of this body-segment in a whole ensemble over which it is 
articulated. The soldier whose body has been trained to 
function part by part for particular operations must in turn 
form an element in a mechanism at another level. The soldiers 



will be instructed first ‘one by one, then two by two, then 
in greater numbers ••• For the handling of weapons, one will 
ascertain that, when the soldiers have been separately 
instructed, they will carry it out two by two, and then 
change places alternately, so that the one on the left may 
learn to adapt himself to the one on the right’ 

( ‘Ordonnance •••’ ). The body is constituted as a part of a 
multi-segmentary machine. 

2. The various chronological series that discipline must 
combine to form a composite time are also pieces of 
machinery. The time of each must be adjusted to the time of 
the others in such a way that the maximum quantity of forces 
may be extracted from each and combined with the optimum 
result. Thus Servan dreamt of a military machine that would 
cover the whole territory of the nation and in which each 
individual would be occupied without interruption but in a 
different way according to the evolutive segment, the genetic 
sequence in which he finds himself. Military life would begin 
in childhood, when young children would be taught the 
profession of arms in ‘military manors’ ; it would end in 
these same manors when the veterans, right up to their last 
day, would teach the children, exercise the recruits, preside 
over the soldiers’ exercises, supervise them when they were 
carrying out works in the public interest, and finally make 
order reign in the country, when the troops were fighting at 
the frontiers. There is not a single moment of life from 
which one cannot extract forces, providing one knows how to 
differentiate it and combine it with others. Similarly, one 
uses the labour of children and of old people in the great 
workshops; this is because they have certain elementary 
capacities for which it is not necessary to use workers who 
have many other aptitudes; furthermore, they constitute a 
cheap labour force; lastly, if they work, they are no longer 
at anyone’ s charge: ‘Labouring mankind’ , said a tax 
collector of an enterprise at Angers, ‘may find in this 
manufactory, from the age of ten to old age, resources 
against idleness and the penury that follows from it’ 



(Marchegay, 360). But it was probably in primary education 
that this adjustment of different chronologies was to be 
carried out with most subtlety. From the seventeenth century 
to the introduction, at the beginning of the nineteenth, of 
the Lancaster method, the complex clockwork of the mutual 
improvement school was built up cog by cog: first the oldest 
pupils were entrusted with tasks involving simple 
supervision, then of checking work, then of teaching; in the 
end, all the time of all the pupils was occupied either with 
teaching or with being taught. The school became a machine 
for learning, in which each pupil, each level and each 
moment, if correctly combined, were permanently utilized in 
the general process of teaching. One of the great advocates 
of the mutual improvement schools gives us some idea of this 
progress: ‘In a school of 360 children, the master who would 

like to instruct each pupil in turn for a session of three 
hours would not be able to give half a minute to each. By the 
new method, each of the 360 pupils writes, reads or counts 
for two and a half hours’ (cf. Bernard). 

3. This carefully measured combination of forces requires a 
precise system of command. All the activity of the 
disciplined individual must be punctuated and sustained by 
injunctions whose efficacity rests on brevity and clarity; 
the order does not need to be explained or formulated; it 
must trigger off the required behaviour and that is enough. 
From the master of discipline to him who is subjected to it 
the relation is one of signalization: it is a question not of 
understanding the injunction but of perceiving the signal and 
reacting to it immediately, according to a more or less 
artificial, prearranged code. Place the bodies in a little 
world of signals to each of which is attached a single, 
obligatory response: it is a technique of training, of 
dressage, that ‘despotically excludes in everything the 
least representation, and the smallest murmur’ ; the 
disciplined soldier ‘begins to obey whatever he is ordered 
to do; his obedience is prompt and blind; an appearance of 
indocility, the least delay would be a crime’ (Boussanelle, 



2). The training of schoolchildren was to be carried out in 
the same way: few words, no explanation, a total silence 
interrupted only by signals - bells, clapping of hands, 
gestures, a mere glance from the teacher, or that little 
wooden apparatus used by the Brothers of the Christian 
Schools; it was called par excellence the ‘Signal’ and it 
contained in its mechanical brevity both the technique of 
command and the morality of obedience. ‘The first and 
principal use of the signal is to attract at once the 
attention of all the pupils to the teacher and to make them 
attentive to what he wishes to impart to them. Thus, whenever 
he wishes to attract the attention of the children, and to 
bring the exercise to an end, he will strike the signal once. 
Whenever a good pupil hears the noise of the signal, he will 
imagine that he is hearing the voice of the teacher or rather 
the voice of God himself calling him by his name. He will 
then partake of the feelings of the young Samuel, saying with 
him in the depths of his soul: “Lord, I am here. ” ’ The 
pupil will have to have learnt the code of the signals and 
respond automatically to them. ‘When prayer has been said, 
the teacher will strike the signal at once and, turning to 
the child whom he wishes to read, he will make the sign to 
begin. To make a sign to stop to a pupil who is reading, he 
will strike the signal once ••• To make a sign to a pupil to 
repeat when he has read badly or mispronounced a letter, a 
syllable or a word, he will strike the signal twice in rapid 
succession. If, after the sign had been made two or three 
times, the pupil who is reading does not find and repeat the 
word that he has badly read or mispronounced - because he 
has read several words beyond it before being called to order 
- the teacher will strike three times in rapid succession, 
as a sign to him to begin to read farther back; and he will 
continue to make the sign till the pupil finds the word which 
he has said incorrectly’ (La Salle, Conduite ••• 137-8; cf. 
also Demia, 21). The mutual improvement school was to exploit 
still further this control of behaviour by the system of 
signals to which one had to react immediately. Even verbal 



orders were to function as elements of signalization: ‘Enter 
your benches. At the word enter, the children bring their 
right hands down on the table with a resounding thud and at 
the same time put one leg into the bench; at the words your 
benches they put the other leg in and sit down opposite their 
slates ••• Take your slates. At the word take, the children, 
with their right hands, take hold of the string by which the 
slate is suspended from the nail before them, and, with their 
left hands, they grasp the slate in the middle; at the word 
slates, they unhook it and place it on the table’ . — 


